"","x"
"1","Copyright © 2010 Tech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99—108, 2010
Effect of Ambient-Gas Forced Flow 0n Oscillatory
Thermocapillary Convection 0f Half—Zone Liquid Bridge
I. Uenol, A. Kawazoe2 and H. Enomoto3
Abstract: The authors focus on thermocapillary—driven ﬂow in a half—zone liquid
bridge and its transition from two—dimensional steady ﬂow to three—dimensional
oscillatory one under an effect of forced convection in ambient gas region around
the liquid bridge. The liquid bridge is settled in a cylindrical ’external shield,’
in which upward/downward forced ﬂow of the ambient gas is added. The critical
condition of the ﬂow transition in the 2—CSt silicone—Oil liquid bridge is examined as
functions of the aspect ratio and the volume ratio of the liquid bridge, and averaged
velocity of the ambient gas. The authors indicate a signiﬁcant effect of the external

ﬂow around the liquid bridge.
Keywords: Liquid bridge, ambient gas ﬂow, ﬂow transition.

1 Introduction
A long—duration on—orbit ﬂuid physics experiment on ""Kibo,"" the J apanese Exper—
imental Module, aboard the International Space Station had been successfully car—
ried out from August to October in 2008 (Kawamura, Nishino, Ohnishi, Ueno &
Matsumoto (2008)). Thermocapillary—driven ﬂow in a half—zone liquid bridge of
30 mm in diameter and its critical condition of ﬂow transition are examined. That
series of experiments indicates an invaluable knowledge on the effects of the grav—
ity and the size of the liquid bridge itself. Recent works, on the other hand, have
revealed a signiﬁcant effect of heat transfer between the liquid bridge and the am—
bient gas region on the critical condition by experiments (Kamotani, Wang, Hatta,
Wang & Yoda (2003), Irikura, Arakawa, Ueno & Kawamura (2005), Mialdun &
Shevtsova (2006)) and numerical simulations (Irikura, Arakawa, Ueno & Kawa—
mura (2005), Shevtsova & Melnikov (2006), Tiwari & Nishino (2007)). That is,

1 Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, J apan

2 Graduate School, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, J apan

3 Graduate School, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, J apan (present: Toyota Motor Corp.,

Aichi, J apan)

"
"2","100 Copyright © 2010 T ech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99-108, 2010
the critical condition is very sensitive to the thermal boundary condition on the free
surface of the liquid bridge. In the present study, the authors put an external shield
around the liquid bridge, in which a ﬁow—rate controlled forced convection of am—
bient gas is realized to investigate the effect of the thermal/mechanical stresses over
the free surface on the thermocapillary—driven in the half—zone liquid bridge.

2 Experiments

Experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. 1. This setup is composed with three maj or
parts; a part for liquid bridge formation, a part for realizing a forced convection in
the shield, and a part for measurement. The formation part of the half—zone liquid
bridge is based on the one introduced in Ref (Ueno, Tanaka & Kawamura (2003)).
A liquid bridge is formed between coaxial cylindrical rods of 5 mm in diameter.
Distance of the gap between the end surfaces of the rods is ﬁxed at 1.6 mm, thus
the aspect ratio of the liquid bridge, F (2 H / R), is kept constant at 0.64, where H
and R are the height and the radius of the liquid bridge, respectively. The ratio of the
volume of the examined liquid bridge to that of the straight cylinder of H in height
and R in radius, V / V0 (2 V / (7rR2H )), is ﬁxed at unity. The ﬂow in the liquid bridge
of this geometry without adding any forced convection in the ambient air eXhibits
an oscillatory ﬂow with m = 3, where m is the azimuthal mode number (Ueno,
Tanaka & Kawamura (2003)). Test ﬂuid in the present study is 2—CSt silicone oil.
Top rod is made of transparent sapphire, which enables the authors to observe the
ﬂow ﬁeld in the bridge through the rod. The edge of the bottom rod made of
aluminum is sharp—tapered to sustain the contact line of the liquid bridge. The side
surface of the bottom rod is Chemically coated for anti—wetting by the test ﬂuid.
Temperature difference between the rods, AT, is realized by heating the top rod to
maintain its temperature at TH and cooling the bottom at TC. Intensity of applied
thermocapillary effect to the liquid bridge is described with Marangoni number
deﬁned as Ma 2 GTATH/ (pVK), where GT is the temperature coefﬁcient of the
surface tension (2 l80/8Tl), p the density, v the kinematic Viscosity, and K the
thermal diffusivity. The part of the liquid bridge formation is completely wrapped
by placing the external shield made of PyreX® glass of 1.5 mm in thickness. The
inner diameter of the external shield DES 2 2R E5 is of 25 mm. The external shield is
hold by the shield holders made of aluminum. Each shield holder has four Channels
for inlet/outlet 0f the ambient gas ﬂow. The direction of the external ﬂow, that is,
upward or downward, is able to be varied. A diffuser is placed right after the
inlet and before the external shield to realize a uniform ﬂow ﬁeld inside the shield.
The ﬂow ﬁeld in the external shield is described with an averaged velocity Uavg 2
Q / 7“ng s — R2) and non—dimensional Reynolds number Re 2 Uang/ Vair, where Q
is the controlled ﬂow rate in the external shield, L the hydraulic diameter of the

"
"3","Effect ofAmbient-Gas Forced Flow 101
granular Channel (= ZRES — 2R), and vair the kinematic Viscosity of the air. In the
present study, upward forced ﬂow in the external shield is deﬁned as positive. Test
ﬂuid for ambient gas is a dried air at 25 °C.
CCD camera
(Top view) El
CCD camera IEEIW
(Side view) heater ‘ Outlet/Inlet
l— T ‘-V , , .—
OP rod _ Liquid ' E
r _ brid e xternal
- MI
lnlet/Outlet
Figure 1: Experimental apparatus. Case of upward forced convection in the exter—
nal shield is described. In the case of downward convection, the diffuser is located
upper part of the top rod, and the top Channel becomes ‘Inlet’ and the bottom ‘Out—
let.’ Another thermocouple is omitted in the ﬁgure.
The ﬂow ﬁeld of the ambient air is Visualized by adding incense smoke. The in—
cense smoke is prepared and stocked in a storage tank to keep at room temperature.
A mixture of the air and the incense smoke is drawn to the test section through
the mixing valve as the ambient gas. A vertical sheet of laser light of 633 nm in
wavelength is irradiated through the external shield. The power of the laser is of 10
mW, thus the irradiation of the laser light sheet would never affect the ﬂows in the
liquid bridge nor of the ambient gas. Refraction 0f the laser light sheet is relatively
small because of the rather large radius of the external shield. The ﬂow ﬁeld of
the ambient air is recorded with a high—speed CCD camera of 250 fps in frame rate
through the external shield. The incident angle of the CCD camera is perpendicular
to that of the laser light sheet.
The ﬂow ﬁeld in the liquid bridge is also observed with another high—speed CCD
camera synchronized with the CCD camera for the side View through the transpar—
ent top rod as the top View. The ﬂow in the bridge is Visualized by suspending
gold—Coated acrylic sphere particles of 15 pm in diameter. Whole liquid bridge
is irradiated by a cold light through the transparent top rod. Detailed information
in the ﬂow Visualization inside the liquid bridge is indicated in Ueno, Tanaka &
Kawamura (2003). This system enables the authors to observe the ﬂow ﬁelds of

"
"4","102 Copyright © 2010 T ech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99-108, 2010
the ambient air in the laser light sheet and 0f the liquid bridge simultaneously.
Temperature inside the liquid bridge is monitored with two Cr—Al thermocouples
0f 25 pm in diameter inserted through the bottom rod. The positions of the tips are
ﬁxed at R/2 from the center of the bridge and at H/2 from the bottom rod surface.
The thermocouples are located with a 90° interval in the azimuthal direction. This
alignment prevents the both thermocouples fall onto the nodes of the standing—wave
oscillation of m = 3. The authors pick out a time series of temperature inside the
liquid bridge with larger amplitude for analytical procedure. This system enables
the authors to avoid any unintended disturbances resulting in non—uniform external
thermo—ﬂuid condition around the liquid bridge. It should be noted that the onset
of the oscillation was preliminarily monitored with three different ways, that is,
the temperature oscillation 0n the free surface of the liquid bridge, the particle
motion observed from the top rod, as well as the temperature oscillation inside
the liquid bridge. The temperature of the liquid bridge surface is measured with a
Cr—Al thermocouple 0f 25 pm in diameter, which is placed in the vicinity of the
bridge free surface without touching it at H/2 in height (mid—height 0f the liquid
bridge). This measuring process is the same measurement system as described in
Ueno, Tanaka & Kawamura (2003). The authors have convinced themselves that
the evaluated critical points with those ways are almost the same, and that the most
favorable wave number m after the onset of oscillation never Changes with inserting
thermocouples inside the bridge.

3 Results & Discussions

Critical condition in the liquid bridge is illustrated in Fig. 2. The critical condition
is described as the critical Marangoni number Mac as a function of Re and Uavg.
The critical Marangoni number in the case of naked liquid bridge, that is, without
the external shield is also plotted. It is noted that the favourable wave number after
the onset of oscillation, n1,

never Changes in the present range of the experiments; the present liquid bridge
exhibits an oscillation with m = 3 as indicated by Ueno, Tanaka & Kawamura
(2003) in the case of without the external shield. In the case of adding upward
forced ﬂow (Uavg > 0), the ﬂow in the liquid bridge becomes slightly unstable, that
is, the critical Marangoni number slightly becomes smaller. And the critical value
converges into a constant value in the present experimental range. In the case of
downward forced ﬂow (Uavg < 0), 0n the other hand, the ﬂow in the liquid bridge
becomes more stable by increasing the velocity.

Snapshot of the ﬂow in the ambient air region near the free surface of the liquid
bridge is presented in Fig. 3. The ﬂow is observed from the side through the

"
"5","Effect of Ambient-Gas Forced Flow 103
Uavg [mm/s]
-1 00 0 1 00
[X1 04] 2
1 .5
z T 3 6
(6: 1 E a B E
E 0 without
05 A with (particle motion)
V with (temp. amp.)
0
-100 —50 0 50 100
Re [-]
Figure 2: Critical condition of the onset of the oscillatory ﬂow in the liquid bridge
as a function of the Reynolds number of the ambient—gas ﬂow; triangle mark indi—
cates the evaluated M ac judged by the suspended particle motion, and the inverted
triangle mark that judged by the temperature oscillation inside the liquid bridge.
Circle mark indicates the evaluated M ac in the case of naked liquid bridge (without
the external shield) judged by the inner temperature oscillation.
transparent external shield. The inner wall of the external shield is out of the ﬁeld
of View in both side of the bridge. The ﬁgures illustrate the ﬂow near the onset
of the oscillation in the liquid bridge. Without any forced ﬂow in the ambient gas
region as shown in (a), the thermooapillary—driven ﬂow over the free surface of
the liquid bridge drives the ambient gas to form double vortioes of about W4 in
size in the horizontal direction around the bridge. The vortex near the bottom rod
stretches itself below the surface of the bottom rod. A signiﬁcant upward ﬂow is
observed in the bulk region of the ambient air, which is driven by a buoyant ﬂow
as generally seen in the case of the naked liquid bridge (Irikura, Arakawa, Ueno &
Kawamura (2005)). Note that the vortex formation and its size under the present
size of the external shield are almost the same as the case of the naked liquid bridge.
In the case of upward forced convection as shown in (b), the vortices around the
liquid bridge do shrink their size, which result in enhancement of the heat transfer
between the liquid bridge to the ambient air. In the bulk region of the ambient
air, an inclined upward ﬂow is realized because of the edge of the bottom rod.
This also results in smaller vortex near the bottom rod. In the case of downward
forced convection as shown in (C), on the other hand, vortioes disappear around the

"
"6","104 Copyright © 2010 T ech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99-108, 2010
liquid bridge to form almost uniform external ﬂow in the ambient air region. It is
noted here that the axial velocity on the free surface of the liquid bridge due to the
thermocapillary effect is of about 10 mm/s under the present condition. That is, the
forced convection in the ambient air is much faster than the themocapillary—driven
one. The forced ﬂow in the ambient air might accelerate the free surface because of
the mechanical stress. The ﬂuid ﬂowing over the free surface penetrates into deeper
region toward the center of the bridge, which is conﬁrmed by the observation of the
ﬂow in the liquid bridge through the top rod.

One can extract valuable information through the thermal ﬁeld of the liquid bridge,
especially of the high Prandtl number ﬂuid. Temperature oscillation of the liquid
bridge corresponds to the azimuthal structure of the oscillatory ﬂow after the onset
of oscillation (Preisser, Schwabe & Soharmann (1983), Ueno, Tanaka & Kawa—
mura (2003)). Noted that any axial oscillation seldom emerges in such a short
liquid bridge of F = 0.64. Figure 4 indicates a frequency distribution of the tem—
perature ﬂuctuation inside the liquid bridge at Ma : 1.1Mac. This means that one
has a correlation of Mao?) < Maw) < Maw as shown in Fig. 2. The frames (a)
to (C) correspond to the conditions shown in Fig. 3 except the Marangoni number.
The oscillatory ﬂow inside the liquid bridge is strongly affected by the ambient—
air ﬂow; the fundamental frequency decrease if one adds an upward forced ﬂow
(b) comparing to the case of (a). An upward forced ﬂow around the liquid bridge
apparently seems to have a deceleration effect against the thermocapillary—driven
ﬂow that drives the liquid over the free surface downward (toward the cold rod);
the upward ﬂow is added as a counter ﬂow against the surface ﬂow of the liquid
bridge. But the upward forced ﬂow in the ambient air region results in accelerating
the outer part of the vortices around the liquid bridge, and in conﬁning the vortices
in the radial direction. The thin accelerated toroidal vortices bring strong shear
force and enhanced heat transfer between the bridge and the ambient air, which
destabilize the ﬂow inside the liquid bridge. If one adds a downward forced ﬂow in
the ambient—air region (C), on the other hand, the fundamental frequency increases
comparing to the case of (a). As shown in Fig. 3 (C), the downward forced ﬂow
prevents a formation of vortices around the bridge; the forced ﬂow in the ambient
air does accelerate the free surface because of the mechanical stress, thus the ﬂuid
ﬂowing over the free surface penetrates into deeper region toward the center of the
liquid bridge. In addition, the heat loss effect is much weaker than the upward
ﬂow case; the temperature of the air of the downward forced ﬂow is higher than
the mean temperature of the liquid bridge because the air is experienced a hot rod
before arriving the liquid bridge. Thus the ﬂow in the liquid bridge is stabilized.
The fundamental frequency of the temperature ﬂuctuation inside the liquid bridge
under Ma : 1.1Mac is plotted in Fig. 5. The fundamental frequency has almost

"
"7","Effect ofAmbient-Gas Forced Flow 105
Re = 0 , Uavg = 0[mm/s]
Top rod I. il 30
,1""?- ‘ M £37“?- . ; T 20
/ 4L 1 -, (a .63: Jig A H
»-— rwﬁg. .31 a
. -' n— 10
Bottom rod;
(21) ' 01 1-2 1.6 1-3 2
Re = 54 ’ Uavg = 55[mm/s] (a) Freqenc‘f [Hz]
30
‘ngs’ E 20
ﬁ/r ' Cl
1 * 3"" ‘ 0')
w, 5m ’V/ El. 10
E o
' 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
(b) (b) Freqency [Hz]
Re = -64 , Uavg = -55[mm/s]
. 30
a .. ¢20
',. ms D
9 I _ ‘ m
. ‘ j n- 10“
f 0 .J. 1.1 .
. - 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
(C) (C) Freqency [Hz]
Figure 3: Snapshots of ambient—air ﬂow Figure 4: Frequency distribution of the
and the liquid bridge (a) without any temperature ﬂuctuation inside the liq—
foreed convection in the external shield uid bridge at Ma : 1.1Mac; (a) with—
(Re = O), (b) with upward forced con— out any forced convection in the exter—
VeCtion (Re = 64), and (C) with down— nal shield (Re = O), (b) with upward
ward forced convection (Re = —64). The forced convection (Re = 64), and (C)
images are obtained by integration for with downward forced convection (Re =
1.0 s (30 frames). —64). Noted that Maw) < Maw) < Maw
as indicated in Fig. 2.

"
"8","106 Copyright © 2010 T ech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99-108, 2010
Um [mmfs]

._. -100 O 100

M

E

~59 1-5 O with shield

:2 (3 21.1)

g 1.4

(D

3

3 ¥

IE 1.3

E

E 1.2

E

%

E 1.1

L 400 —50 0 50 100

Re [-]

Figure 5: Fundamental frequency of the temperature ﬂuctuation inside the liquid
bridge at Ma : 1.1Mac against the velocity of the forced ﬂow inside the external
shield.

.T. U,5W9 [mmis]

E 400 D 100

H:

E . M80

“3 1'3 O Freq.

us: 12 ¥ (8 :11)

E 1.1 §

gt"": 1

t E

E 0.9

“:3

g -100 -50 U 50 100

Re [-]

Figure 6: Comparison between the critical Marangoni number Mac (as shown in
Fig. 2) and the fundamental frequency of the temperature ﬂuctuation inside the
liquid bridge at Ma : 1.1Mac (as shown in Fig. 5) against the velocity of the
forced ambient—air ﬂow inside the external shield. Relative values are plotted to
those under Re = 0.
linear tendency against the Re 0f the ambient—air ﬂow. In order to compare the
tendencies of the fundamental frequency of the temperature oscillation inside the
liquid bridge (as shown in Fig. 5) and the critical condition (in Fig. 2) against
the forced ﬂow in the external shield, distributions of the relative frequency and
critical Marangoni number to those under Re = 0 is illustrated in Fig. 6. In the case

"
"9","Effect of Ambient-Gas Forced Flow 107
of the upward forced ﬂow, the relative variation of the fundamental frequency of
the temperature oscillation inside the liquid bridge almost corresponds to the one
of the critical Marangoni number. In the case of the downward forced ﬂow, on
the other hand, the relative variation of the fundamental frequency is much smaller
than that of the critical Marangoni number. Further information on the acceleration
effect by the forced ambient—air ﬂow on the aXial/radial velocities of the ﬂuid in the
liquid bridge is needed. The authors will carry out further research focusing on the
affected ﬂow inside the liquid bridge by applying additional measurement systems
to extract information of the three—dimensional velocity ﬁelds inside/outside the
liquid bridge.

4 Concluding Remarks

The authors carry out an experimental study on the thermocapillary—driven ﬂow
in the half—zone liquid bridge of 2—CSt silicone oil exposed to a forced convection
in the external shield coaxially wrapping the bridge. The effects on the critical
condition of the onset of the transition of the ﬂow in the bridge from the two—
dimensional steady ﬂow to the three—dimensional oscillatory one and on the thermal
ﬂuctuation after the onset are examined. Vortex formation around the liquid bridge
due to the forced convection is described based on the observation from the side.
The authors also indicate a relation between the critical condition in terms of the
critical Marangoni number and the oscillation of the temperature inside the liquid
bridge as a function of the ﬂow velocity of the forced ambient—air ﬂow.
Acknowledgement: The authors gratefully acknowledge members of JEREMI
(J apan—Europe Research Experiment on Marangoni Instability), Prof. Koichi Nishino
(Yokohama National UniV., J apan), Dr. Satoshi Matsumoto (J apan Aerospace EX—
ploration Agency (JAXA)), Dr. Valentina Shevtsova, Dr. Denis Melnikov, Dr.
Sacha Mialdun, (Université Libre de Bruxelles), Prof. Dr. Hendrik C. Kuhlmann
(Technische Universitat Wien), Prof. Dr. Dietrich Schwabe (J ustus Liebig—Universitat),
Dr. Stefano Mazzoni (BSA), and Dr. J ose Maria Montanaro (Universidad de EX—
tremadura), for fruitful discussions. A part of this study is ﬁnancially supported by
JAXA.

References

Irikura, M.; Arakawa, Y.; Ueno, 1.; Kawamura, H. (2005): Effect of ambient
ﬂuid ﬂow upon onset of oscillatory thermocapillary convection in half—zone liquid
bridge, Microgravity Sci. Tech, vol. 16, pp. 176—180.

Kamotani, Y.; Wang, L.; Hatta, S.; Wang, A.; Yoda, S. (2003): Free surface

"
"10","108 Copyright © 2010 T ech Science Press FDMP, V01.6, no.1, pp.99-108, 2010
heat less effect on oscillatory thermocapillary ﬂow in liquid bridges of high Prandtl
number ﬂuids, Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., V01. 46, pp.3211—3220.

Kawamura, H; Nishino, K.; Ohnishi, M.; Ueno, 1.; Matsumoto, S. (2008): A
microgravity experiment on the critical Marangoni number for a liquid bridge on
International Space Station, Proc. 4th International Marangoni Association Con-
ference (IMA4) (Chiba, Japan, Oct. 21“ — 23rd 2008), pp. 41—42.

Mialdun, A.; Shevtsova, V. (2006): Inﬂuence of interfacial heat exchange on the
ﬂow organization in liquid bridge, Microgravity Sci. Tech, V01. 18, pp.146—149.
Preisser, E; Schwabe, D.; Scharmann, A. (1983): Steady and oscillatory thermo—
capillary convection in liquid columns with free cylindrical surface J. F luid Mech. ,
V01. 126, pp.545—567.

Shevtsova, V. M.; Melnikov, D. E. (2006): Thermocapillary convection in a liquid
bridge subjected to interfacial cooling, Microgravity Sci. Tech, V01. 18, pp.128—
131.

Tiwari, S.; Nishino, K. (2007): Numerical study to investigate the effect of parti—
tion block and ambient air temperature on interfacial heat transfer in liquid bridges
of high Prandtl number ﬂuid, J. Crystal Growth, V01. 300, pp.486—496.

Ueno, 1.; Tanaka, S.; Kawamura, H. (2003): Oscillatory and Chaotic Thermo—
capillary Convection in a Half—Zone Liquid Bridge, Phys. F luids, V01. 15, pp.408—
416.

"
