"","x"
"1","5‘3”» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _

. 50v :3; Clence lreC

"""" [lﬁmﬁlll/TXUUUHTE/l
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23 m

WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
MAT ROSHKA—T he ﬁrst ESA external payload 0n the
Internat10nal Space Station
J . Dettmanna’*, G. Reitzb’**, G. Gianﬁglioa
aEuropean Space Agency (ESA), Keplerlaan I, 2201 AZ, Noordwijk, The Netherlands
bDLR, Aerospace Medicine, Radiobiology Division, D-51147 [(6111, Germany
Received 20 September 2005; received in revised form 6 April 2006; accepted 18 April 2006
Available online 12 September 2006
Abstract

MATROSHKA is an experiment unit for studies of the depth dose distribution of the different components of the orbital
radiation ﬁeld at different sides of the organs of astronauts during an extravehicular activity (EVA). MATROSHKA consists of a
contained human phantom upper torso, allowing the accommodation of dedicated radiation measurement devices. MATROSHKA
is currently installed outside to the Russian Segment “ZVEZDA” 0f the International Space Station. It is designed as a “long-
duration, non-maintainable, space-eXposed payload”.

The objective of the MATROSHKA experiment is to determine the empirical relations between measurable absorbed doses
and the tissue absorbed doses in a realistic human phantom exposed to the concrete radiation ﬁeld to be monitored. The radiation
ﬁeld during EVA is that of the free space environment modiﬁed only by the space suit. Since EVAs are a substantial fraction
of the work-schedule in the space station scenario, such measurements have highest priority, especially in View of long term
spaceﬂight endeavours in the frame of space exploration.

Once the ratios for the tissue absorbed doses and surface absorbed doses are known for a given radiation ﬁeld around the
human body, these values may be used in future exposures to determine the required tissue absorbed doses from measurements
of surface absorbed doses. In addition, the objectives are to enlarge the still modest quantity of empirical data of the composition
of the radiation ﬁeld in space. This includes: the mapping of the radiation environment in space and its variation With time
and orbital parameters (such as solar cycle, solar ﬂare event, inclination and altitude) and the study of the modiﬁcation of
the radiation dose in space by mass shielding (e.g. attenuation, build up and/or activation). The collected data will be used to
reduce the uncertainties of risk estimates for radiation-induced cancer and for the reﬁnement of realistic shielding distributions
in future spaceﬂights. There are other important scientiﬁc aspects especially regarding radiation health for the crew, help in
mission planning and design of the ISS environmental monitoring package.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Dosimetry; Space radiation
1. Introduction
MATROSHKA is an ESA multi—user facility, Which
, was designed to provide accurate information on the
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +31715655435. d. t. d . h d . t h.
E-mail address: jan.dettmann@esa.int (J . Dettmann). 1‘3. 13' 10? . 0868 m umfm Olgans urlng fm 6X rave ?C—
**Also to be Correspondent. Te1.: +4922036013137. 1113f aCtIVltY (EVA) whlch IS a Prerequlte f0? PICCISC
E-mail address: guenther.reitz@dlr.de (G. Reitz). risk assessments [1,2]. The key part of MATROSHKA
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2006.04.018

"
"2","18 J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23
is a human phantom upper torso, equipped With nu— ' .
merous radiation detectors. This phantom is mounted .- !
on an aluminum structure (base structure (B8)), Which . I I l‘ _
provides space for experiment and facility electronics \ \ , 1
and is enveloped by a carbon ﬁber structure (container). - .
Container and BS form a Closed, pressurized volume 1‘ \
of 1.05 atm for the phantom and, therefore, also pro— w \ 1 ‘ ‘
tect the phantom material against the space environment \ ' ‘
factors like ultraviolet radiation and vacuum. The fa— ' ‘
eility is equipped With radiation detectors, has a mass
of 68 kg and occupies a cylindrical volume of 600 mm 1
in diameter and a height of 1100mm. MATROSHKA
is designed to allow disassembly/assembly operations __
to exchange experiments inside the Russian Service \ ‘ 9. . “—
MOdme<RSM>° F"" 11th 1' th ' t 1 td(1th1 tb
Besides rovidin room for assive and active eX— 1_g' ' n e S Ices e “perm?“ S are 9“” p0 ye yene u es
periment pfekages (gdetectOI‘S), 151ATROSHKA has the w1th TLDs, a NTDP and an actlve experlrnent sensor).
capability for housekeeping (H/K) data acquisition
(experiment/facility status, temperature and pressure) The slices are equipped with channels and cut—outs to
and experiment data vaUiSitiOIl. H/ K and experiment allow the accommodation of active experiment sensors
data are tempor 8.1“in stored and then t1“ ansferred t0 the and passive dosimeters as well as three temperature sen—
Russian onboard data management system. Tempera— sors. They carry most of the active and passive dosime—
ture, pressure and the main status data Will be delivered ters to measure the doses throughout and especially at
as service telemetry continuously to the payload data deﬁned organ sites (cg, stomach, lungs, kidney, colon,
COHtI‘Ol server (for facility status monitoring from the eyes), In addition, the phantom carries a coat (poncho
MiSSiOH COHtTOI Center, MOSCOW)- and hood) equipped With passive detectors to measure
All scientiﬁc and H/K data are stored in the RSM. the skin dose (see Fig. 2),
Part Of these data will be dOWhlihked, at thiS time Via US A dosimeter telescope (DOSTEL) is mounted on top
voice link. All data are returned to ground on PCMCIA of the head and a tissue—equivalent proportional counter
cards (Personal Computer Memory Card International (TEPC) in front of the phantom.
Association) using SOYUZ.
MATROSHKA is the mOSt signiﬁcant international 2,2, The base structure
cooperation in space dosimetry for the determination of
the radiation exposure of astronauts and cosmonauts. The BS is an aluminum structure which acts as me—
Sixteen international research organizations (Table 1), chanical interface to the RSM universal working plat—
space agencies and universities participate With active form (UWP), It hosts the MATROSHKA electronics
and passive dosimetry systems. (MATE) and the experiment electronic boards and pro—
Vides With the power and data connectors the electrical
2. Elements of MATROSHKA interface to the RSM. It is equipped With one valve and
one pipe element to allow for pressurization of the fa—
2.1. The phantom Cility. The BS accommodates a heater element and ther—
mostats for thermal reasons, three facility temperature
The phantom body is made of commercial phantom sensors and three Russian sensors (two temperature and
parts, well introduced in the ﬁeld of radiotherapy. It con— one pressure). The Russian sensors are powered directly
sists of 33 slices composed of natural bones, each With from the RSM and deliver therefore independently from
a thickness of 25 mm, embedded in tissue—equivalent MATROSHKA health status data.
plastic of different density for tissue and lungs.
The phantom slices are stacked together over a man— 2.3. The container
drel to stabilize the Whole body. By positioning the
slices along the mandrel the passive experiments can be The MATROSHKA container is a carbon ﬁber rein—
removed or replaced (Fig. 1). The passive sensors have forced plastic monolith sandwich structure. It Will be
to be brought back to ground for evaluation. mounted on the BS, hosts the phantom including its

"
"3","J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23 19
j ' module managing information from siX temperature
sensors and two pressure sensors.
1 a Experiment data are collected every 6 h using a multi—
“' L ,3. plexed RS422 serial line and transmitted to the RSM
‘ . ‘i E """" E.“ onboard data management system Via a CAN (Bosch
3 I t y "" 2.0B) serial interface together With the H/K data Which
'I . J - are acquired every 10min.
l
1 j. i 2.5. The dosemeters
V l.
- ' F Due to the complex radiation ﬁeld different detectors
. - I , will be implemented inside and outside the phantom.
"" I l——-~ 4 Active detectors are monitoring devices and are capable
"" — ., h ' , to provide real—time radiation data. Passive detectors
‘7 ,_ I integrate the radiation data and need to be evaluated
“ -— ‘ . after the space exposure time of one year on ground.
‘ m i 1 The various detectors are contributed by the research
I’. II - "" organizations listed in Table 1.
i I v ,; 2.5.]. Passive detectors
. 4 . Thermoluminescence detecters (TLDs) are widely
, ,’ k used 1n the MATROSHKA faCIhty. TLDs are accom—
- 4 ‘ modated in polyethylene tubes at distances of lin sep—
/, '— g arated by polyethylene spacers. The tubes ﬁt into the
b ‘ channels milled in each slice. In total 356 channels (in
Fig. 2. The phantom is mounted on the base structure and dressed €111.33 Slices) allow a tOtal number Of 1634 pOSitionS
With the poncho and hood. In front of the phantom the TEPC can mSlde the phagtom’ .arranged m a way that. the TLDS
be seen. The blue cable entrances mark the position of the active are p0s1t10ned “1 a 1111 grld “1 eaCh 0f the SllCCS. Flg. 3
experiments inside the phantom. gives an example of slice #4 (phantom head) with the
dosimeter distribution and 26 dosimeter positions for
depth dose determination. At each of the 1634 points a
scientiﬁc experiments and provides a structural support minimum number of 6 up to 12 TLDs made out Of dif.
and ﬁxation 0f the phantom. This is achieved by press— ferent TLD materials (e.g. a combination of TLD 600
ing the container on the phantom shoulders and head (6LinMg, Ti), TLD 700 (7LinMg, Ti) and TLD 7OOH
during When screwing the container to the BS. The con— (7LiF: Mg, Ti) are located. This allows besides the de—
tainer also carries the thermal insulation needed for ap— termination of the absorbed dose also some information
propriate thermal contr01.Amean mass shielding of less about the thermal and epithermal neutron dose using
than 1 g/cm2 is provided in order to simulate the space the pair method.
suit shielding Of an astronaut during EVA- Nuclear track detector packages (NTDPs) are accom—
modated in ﬁve cut—outs representing organ locations.
2.4. MATROSHKA electronics (MATE) The packages are occupied by a combination of TLDs
(total number of TLDs per bOX is 60) and CR—39
MATE provides the electrical and data interface unit detectors, where the CR—39 are arranged in three
between the RSM and MATROSHKA With its active orthogonal directions to enable determination of linear
experiment electronics (AEEs). MATE consists of the energy transfer (LET) and particle spectra in the x—,
following four units: a power conditioning unit to re— y— and z—aXis. Further on the packages contain CR—39
ceive, convert and distribute the ﬁltered and regulated detectors covered with converter foils for neutron dose
power to its internal electronics subsystems and t0 the measurements.
AEEs, a data handling module to communicate With Both systems, TLDs and NTDPs, are integrated in
the RSM and the AEEs and to collect and temporarily poncho and hood of the phantom together with 22
store scientiﬁc and H/K information, a memory module passive neutron detector packages. The TLDs are dis—
as temporary buffer for experiment data and a sensor tributed around the torso, while the NTDPs occupy siX

"
"4","20 J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23
Table 1
Science team of MATROSHKA
Principal investigators
Giinther Reitz (ESA PI) German Aerospace Center, Radiation Biology Division, Kéln, Germany
Vladislaw Petrov (Russian PI) Institute for Biomedical Problems, IMBP, Moscow, Russia
Co-investigators
Rudolf Beaujean Christian—Albrechts—Universitéit Kiel, Kiel, Germany
M. Luszik—Bhadra Physikalisch—Technische Bundesanstalt, PTB, Braunschweig, Germany
V. Shurshakov, Y. Akatov Institute for Biomedical Problems, IMBP, Moscow, Russia
P. Olko, P. Bilski Institute for Nuclear Physics, INP, Krakow, Poland
J . Pailfalvi Nuclear Energy Research Institute, AERI, Budapest, Hungary
D. OSullivan DIAS, Dublin, Ireland
D. Bartlett National Radiological Protection Board, NRPB, Chilton, UK
N. Vana Nuclear Institute of the Austrian Universities, ATI, Vienna, Austria
Y. Uchihori NIRS, Chiba, Japan
S. Yoshitomi, A. Nagamatsu JAXA, Japan
F. Cucinotta, M.G01ight1y NASA JSC, Houston, TX, USA
B. Atwell Space Systems Division, Boeing, Houston, TX, USA
E. Benton Eril Research Inc., Richmond, CA , USA
S. McKeever Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA
J . Miller and C. Zeitlin Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
. ,, 0f the phantom and the electronics (analog and digi—
. tal section) mounted in the active experiment electronic
Y box located in the BS 0f the MATROSHKA facility.
"" I The sensor contains a telescope of two planar silicon
J / ‘ ' detectors (PIPS) With closely attached Charge sensitive
‘ "" \ - ampliﬁers (CSA). The size of the detectors is 6.93 em2
"" ‘ l \ . at different thicknesses of 150 and 300 um. TWO sili—
- Q ‘ , ﬁ 1 con PIN diodes 0f 1 em2 area and 300 um thicknesses
' \~ Q \. are added for cross reference to the measurements of
h . r the seintillator/silicon detectors (SSD) experiment. One
. f! )v 1’ . diode is mounted as a bottom detector in the telescope
""/‘1 _ , and can be used to compensate the geometric factor of
’ (2‘ . ‘r the telescope. The second diode is mounted beside the
F ‘ — v telescope With a Viewing direction perpendicular to the
telescope axis.
Fig. 3. The single slices are stringed over the red. A sectionin the The DOSTEL instrument Will C ontinu ously m 0 nit O 1,
head reglon 0f the phantom 1s shown. In the shces the expenments . .
are located (polyethylene tubes With TLDs, a NTDP and an active the particle ﬂux’ dose 1‘ ate and LET SpeCtra m the 1‘ ange
experiment sensor). from 0.1 to 200 keV um‘l behind a 10W shielding of
about 1 g/cm2. Measurements of the two PIN diodes are
used to compare count rate and dose rate measurements
positions at the Poncho and one position 011 t0p 0f the at different Viewing directions during crossings of the
Hood. These dosemeters serve as skin dosemeters. South Atlantic Anomaly.
Five detector packages are mounted outside the multi—
layer insulation (MLD (three at the ffOIlt 311d tWO at the 2.5.2.2. Scintillator/Silicon detectors The SSDs con—
back). These packages contain TLD and CR—39 exper— sist of ﬁve detector units mounted inside the phan—
iments for the determination of the depth dose behind tom and the electronics (analog and digital section)
10w shielding thicknesses. mounted in the active experiment electronic box 10—
eated in the BS 0f the MATROSHKA facility. The DU
2.5.2. Active detectors consists of one solid organic scintillator (BC430, size
2.5.2.1. DOSTEL The DOSTEL experiment consists 10.7 X 10.7 X 20 mm3), siX Hamamatsu PIN photodiodes
of a detector unit (DU) mounted on top of the head and ﬁve CSA. The outer dimension of the DU is

"
"5","J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23 21
25 x 40 X 25 mm3 Where the height of 25 mm is deﬁned
by the thickness of the human phantom slices.
Four S2744 diodes for the light detection (each With a .
light sensitive area of 10 X 20 mmz) are mounted along l
the long sides of the scintillator With four individual t ’
CSAs attached to them. TWO S3509 diodes cover the '
two small sides of the scintillator as an anti—coincidence
shield. ‘ o
The SSD experiment is designed to separately mea— ' ‘
sure the dose of Charged and neutral radiation in a tissue— l ‘ .
equivalent BC430—scintillat0r at ﬁve different positions
inside the human phantom. The energy spectrum of re— A A
coil protons from neutron interactions Will be measured
in the range 1—10 MeV. The ionizing part Will be mea—
sured in the LET range from 0.1 to 200 keV nm‘l.
2.5.2.3. TEPC (tissue-equivalent proportional counter)
The TEPC is located in front of the belly of the human
phantom. Sensor head and electronics form one unit. ‘u. -
The sensor is a cylindrical detector of 50.8mm long _ A
and 50.8 mm in diameter, surrounded by a 1.9 mm thick I '
tissue—equivalent A—100 plastic. The detector is ﬁlled
With a very lOW—pressure propane gas and typically
operated at a voltage of —680V dc. The signal from
the detector is fed into a very lOW noise preampliﬁer ’
and two parallel ampliﬁers that differ in gain by a fac— _ _ _ _
tor of 50. The output Of each ampliﬁer iS pulse—height 21g. 4. MATROSHKA 1n the Neutral Buoyancy Fac111ty at the
. . . uropean Astronaut Centre (EAC).
analyzed us1ng a dual 256—Channel analog—to—digital
converter (ADC). The measurement range is from
about 0.4 to 1250 keV nm‘l. The energy resolution
0f the electronics is 0.1keV “m_1 in the range below 0 training model 2 (TrM—2) for intravehicular activities
20 and 5keV nm‘l above 20 keV nm‘l. The lineary (IVA) training,
energy spectra are recorded at l—min intervals and the . engineering model (EM) for complex integration
absorbed doses at 2 0r 20—s intervals depending on the tests,
dose rate- . ﬂight model (FM).
The TrM—l was successfully tested in the Neutral Buoy—
3. MATROSHKA development and installation ancy Test Facility (NBL) facility of the European As—
status tronaut Centre (EAC) in Cologne in 2002 (Fig. 4) With
participation of Russian cosmonaut representatives.
An industrial team lead by DLR (German Centre of Thereafter, the TrM—l was delivered to the Gagarin
Aerospace), responsible for the facility deﬁnition as— Cosmonaut Training Centre for the training of the cos—
sembly, integration and test, With DTM Technologies in monauts who later on installed MATROSHKA 0n the
Modena, Italy, responsible for the construction of the RSM. The EM has been delivered to RSC Energia in
container and BS and Kayser Italia from Livorno, Italy, J une 2003 for ﬁrst interface tests With Russian Simula—
responsible for the electronic and software development tion hardware and software. The FM delivery and ﬁnal
as subcontractors, and with support from RSC Energia, acceptance took place in December 2003, With a ﬁnal
Russia, produced four MATROSHKA models and re— testing of the MATE S/W with the Russian provided
lated ground support equipment (GSE): PLSU (payload server unit) in Moscow in early J anuary
2004 (Fig. 5). MATROSHKA was launched to the 188
0 training model 1 (TrM—l) for EVA training, from Baikonur on Progress l3P on J anuary 29th, 2004.

"
"6","22 J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23
’5- ' ~ ‘ To be able to accurately determine the radiation dose
‘ "" ‘ ‘ received during the in—orbit operation, it is necessary to
have a precise time allocation for the duration in orbit.
,1 , So it is required to have not more than an accumulated
91"" F1 . ‘ two month of storage time inside the ISS.
_ . , ""1’ .
’ j _ ;;- 4. Operatlons
f'i‘.;' t'fp'. -y
:15"" ' q"" I MATROSHKA was brought into operations on
’ L ,y , \ R_',_ April 26, 2004 after a successful test using the ground
. - ““3 1 '1 segment from RSC—Energia and operating the PLSU
Q '§ ‘ 30
' - 3' Temperature 1 Temperature 2 Temperature 3
1 '. 1“ j. ‘
"" .I . ' “' ‘ 20 E
, I - °
""1 ‘I;.-,‘ A 10 r
R "" - .- 1‘ E- 8
H“ ‘ «I 5 t \ 1% 0
' l' 7 5
5.12.7}... .. 2 g f 1
v ' J . ‘ ' ‘- H —10 I
- “““' .. k
' 1' —20 "" J
, - . . - l
—30
Fig. 5. MATROSHKA FM, integrated and ready to be installed into 1'4'04 1'5'04 1'6'04 1'7'04
PROGRESS Fig. 6. Temperature proﬁle inside the phantom.
After docking 0f the Progress transport vehicle MA— 1000
TROSHKA was ﬁrst transferred into the Russian Seg—
ment of the 188. With an EVA MATROSHKA has been 100
then transported to the outside of the RSM, and installed A
on a “UWP”. i
MATROSHKA will remain up to 1.5 years on the 3. 10 I -. t .
RSM, and then it Will be retrieved by EVA and brought 9&3 - . I ‘ . 1 ’ - . f ' ’ "" ' I E
back into the Space Station. During retrieval, any gas a 1 ‘5' u; ' "" . . l i . 2' 'j E
in the facility must be vented to prevent contamination 8 ‘ "" I 2
0f the 188. Inside the RSM, MATROSHKA will be 0.1
repressurized before disassembly. The MLI including
passive sensors embedded in the MLI Will be removed 3
and packed into a special bag for return to Earth. 0'01
Thereafter, the cosmonaut Will remove the container; g g g g g
loosen the cap of MATROSHKA and shift up the slices 3 3 8 3 3
one by one to remove the passive detectors. These Will g g g g g
be placed into a storage bag for return to Earth in a 8 8 8 8 8
SOYUZ capsule. These IVA activities Will be trained :5. :5. :5. :5. i
by the related cosmonauts in the Gagarin Cosmonaut N N N N N
Training Centre with the help of TrM—Z, Fig. 7. Does rate measurements from TEPC.

"
"7","J. Dettmann et al. / Acta Astronautica 60 (2007) 17—23 23
MATROSKA DOSTEL D3 / D4
0 100 200 300
103
o———o D3
D4
ﬁe
102 f ﬂaw
(D g mfggﬂgggg‘qggs
4—- o “3&1 1a,
% J item
8 15° ” ?ﬁiﬁyﬁ
i"" E“ sign
1 0, 1:1?”
‘0 l»? «layman
iii {lillllif
.11 ﬂailing? o
“0' ILLIDIHLIHIIO :Ol OOAWU III 0
1; pl; ln‘llnnul 115;: l
°‘“° 51: llt'r: | ‘1""?3‘2’H 1‘“ °
'1 ""W ' \ :l1::=:: Iii
100 _ __._ .. __,‘ _. _ _ _.
O 100 200 300
ch#
Fig. 8. Count measurements of the two different silicon detectors used in DOSTEL.
together with MATROSHKA. The results were satis— Acknowledgments
factory, although the communication between the seV—
eral onboard systems is not ﬂawless. So is the scientiﬁc The ﬁrst acknowledgement is for the large number of
data download from MATROSHKA not as continuous investigators listed in Table 1 who have contributed to
as planned and it has been necessary to supplement it by the scientiﬁc deﬁnition of MATROSHKA under leader—
physically downloading of PCMCIA cards on SOYUZ ship of the Principle Investigator Dr. G. Reitz (DLR).
return missions. Also acknowledged is the cooperation between the
The evaluation of the H/K ﬁles has shown that MA— European Space Agency BSA and the Russian Fed—
TROSHKA behaves as designed concerning tempera— eral Space Agency RosaViakosmos that enabled the
ture and pressure data. The temperature range in the present MATROSHKA ﬂight on the RSM 0f the ISS.
facility moves between —20 and +20 0C (see Fig. 6). All industrial and institutional contributors to the MA—
The pressure inside the facility is 950 mbar. This con— TROSHKA design, manufacture integration, test and
ﬁrms the excellent work done by the industrial team in operations are acknowledged as well, especially DLR
the structural and thermal design. (Germany), Kayser Italia (Italy), DTM (Italy) and RSC
Most of the scientiﬁc data available up to now Energia (Russia).
were brought back to ground on a PCMCIA card with
SOYUZ. Until now more than 100 data ﬁles are avail— References
able from the three active detectors. The two ﬁgures
below show preliminary dose rate information from the [1] Recommendations Of the international COmIIllSSlOIl 0n
TEPC (Fig 7) and a particle ﬂux measurement from radiological protection, ICRP Report No. 60, Pergamon Press,
' . . . New York, 1991.
DOSTEL (Flg; 8)' ihose data are only Prehmm and [2] T. Berger, G. Reitz, The MATROSHKA facility—dose
need ﬁnal calibration. The DOSTEL data are printed determination during an EVA, Workshop on Radiation
versus channel numbers, the highest Channel number is Monitoring for the International Space Station; (http://www.
representing the highest LET. magnet.oma.be/wrmiss/workshops/ninth/workshop.html).

"
