"","x"
"1","Trans. J SASS Space Tech. J apan
Vol. 7, No. ists26, pp. Tc_l-Tc_5, 2009
On-Orbit Veriﬁcation of Space Inﬂatable Structures
By Takahira AOKI 1), Hiroshi FURUYA 2), Kosei ISHIMURA 3), Yasuyuki MIYAZAKI 4), Kei SENDA 5),
Hiroaki TSUNODA 6), Ken HIGUCHI 3), Junichiro ISHIZAWA 7), Naoko KISHIMOTO 3), Ryoji SAKAI 8),
Akihito WATANABE 8), and Kazuki WATANABE 9)
1) Department ofAeronaulz'cs and Astronautics, University of T 01020, T 01020, Japan
2) Department ofBuz'll Engineering, T 0ky0 Institute of T echnology, Yokohama, Japan
3) JAM/ISAS, Sagamihara, Japan
4) Department ofAerospace Engineering, Nihon University, F unabashi, Japan
5) Department ofAeronaulz'cs and Astronautics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
6) Department ofAeronaulz'cs and Astronautics, T okaz' University, Hiralsuka, Japan
7) JAM/ARD, T sukuba, Japan
8)Sakazse Adlech, C0., Ltd, Maruoka, Japan
9)WEL Research, C0., Ltd, IChided, Japan
(Received May 2nd, 2008)
This paper gives an overview of the currently planned on-orbit space veriﬁcation experimental device complex
composed of multiple inﬂatable demonstration units, proposed by the authors’ group. The compact device named SIMPLE
is designed to be suitable for one of the shared experimental installations that constitute a single experimental block
attached to the Exposed Facility of Kibo J apanese Experimental Module (JEM) of 188. The SIMPLE mission was accepted
by JAXA as the candidate of the secondary application of the Exposed Facility of JEM at the end of last year.
Key Words: Inﬂatable structure, deployable structure, membrane, extensional beam, space experiment
1. Introduction inﬂatable structure. However, the inﬂatable structure was not
accepted in any of the projects that employ deployable
Inﬂatable structures are one of the key technologies to structure. This is probably because the technology of
attain drastic elimination of empty weight of space structures inﬂatable structure is not yet regarded as sufﬁciently mature,
as well as to increase the logistic efﬁciency into the space. even though the advantages of the inﬂatable structure are
The underlying idea is to inﬂate the packed or folded well understood.
membrane structures or their components to form the ﬁnal The authors’ group has been leading the research and
conﬁgurations utilizing the operational gas. Their shapes are development of inﬂatable structures. For example, the
retained either by the pressurization or by rigidizing the rigidization method and materials, the folding method, and
membrane material. Inﬂatable devices may also be used as the application technology of the inﬂatable structure have
the driving ‘mechanism’ to deploy the stored shell-like been intensively studied by the authors, which are the key
structures. Moreover, the inner volume enclosed with technologies to develop the high-performance products of
inﬂatable membrane can be designed for use as the biological space inﬂatable structure4)'26). Our study was applied to the
habitation or plantation space. sounding rocket experiment of JAXA in 2 September, 2007
Inﬂatable structure has attracted a lot of attention since by S—520-23 rocket (Fig.1). The inﬂatable rod ‘SPINAR’
IAE (Inﬂatable Antenna Experiment) of STS—77 mission by (Space Inﬂatable Actuated Rod) was used as the extensible
NASA in 19961). This mission has boosted the research and antenna to observe the ionosphere in this experiment, which
development on inﬂatable structures. ESA launched IRDT is the ﬁrst space veriﬁcation of inﬂatable structure in Japan,
(Inﬂatable Re-entry and Descent Technology) satellite in and the ﬁrst practical application of inﬂatable structure to the
20022), which ended in failure. NASA launched Mars extensible antenna. The SPINAR is the STEM of
explorers Opportunity and Spirit in 2004 that were equipped TriaXially-Woven Carbon/Epoxy Fabric Composite. The
with the air bags as the shock absorber when landing on Mars. inﬂatable tube is inserted in the STEM. When the tube is
Bigelow Aerospace launched the inﬂatable habitat module inﬂated, the tube pushes out the STEM, so that the STEM is
GENESIS-I in 20063). extended without complicated mechanisms. After the
Elemental technologies of inﬂatable structures, in extension is completed, the appropriate stiffness of the
particular the control of the deployment and the rigidization structure is kept by the STEM even if the inﬂation gas is
of the membrane material, have been studied actively as well released from the tube.
as the on-orbit experiment mentioned above. As IAE was not
successful in the deployment, the analysis of the deployment
behavior has also been extensively studied after IAE.
Thus a lot of efforts have been put into the research on
Copyright© 2009 by the J apan Society for Aeronautical and Space Sciences and ISTS. All rights reserved.
Tc 1

"
"2","Trans. J SASS Space Tech. Japan Vol. 7, No. ists26 (2009)
- -‘__;=. 547' , "" ~A ~, ‘ acquire the technological skills and operating know-how of
&//g 7 :3 inﬂatable structural systems. The veriﬁcation of concepts and
\.,‘,I ""‘5‘ ""a "" «. . ' 7% technologies include those for inﬂatable extension, pressure
\ 3 L"" f .. , ‘ ‘3} . retainment, on-orbit rigidization, multiple-cells conﬁguration
. . g? N;%gyf 41/? _ ‘ g , and inﬂatable frame conﬁguration. Applicability
3.. g,"" ' (732/3 3' demonstration aims to establish technologies for biological
. &\ 5' «M: x”: environment sustainability. Acquisition of skills and
; a _ 3: p ‘. know-how are to be concentrated on high storage efﬁciency,
_ \7 ‘ \“ﬂ' reliable inﬂation system, structure/device design, structural
.4 ‘ 7‘ ’ identiﬁcation and long-term space environment operation.
(1)EXperimenta1 Setup Above all of these objectives, the research group is eager to
7 make a strong appeal of the highly useful features of the
space inﬂatable structure as one of the technological bases
for future space exploitation.
3. Mission device complex
The schematic of the current design of SIMPLE is shown
in Fig. 2 and 3. Figure 2 illustrates SIMPLE in deployed
conﬁguration, and Fig.3 in the stored conﬁguration.
Bus Unit (BU) ..
Inﬂatable Material "" ;.~._ ' ' .-
(2) Extension of SPINAR Experimental Panel (IMP) -_____ 1 7'11: ‘. '
Fig. 1. Space veriﬁcation of inﬂatable antenna 5
1'5. __:' _ :i
Though there have been lots of research on inﬂatable T
structures, few have been ever used in space as mentioned Inﬂatable Space Terrarium (IST)
above. This fact means that on-orbit veriﬁcation is required
for the practical use of inﬂatable structures. To break through \
this situation, and also to progress the research furthermore, ‘. Inﬂatable Extension Mast (IEM)
the authors’ group is planning to conduct on-orbit I
veriﬁcation of inﬂatable structures. This paper gives an (1) EXterior
overview of the current designed of the on-orbit space Power Unit (PU)
veriﬁcation experimental device complex composed of MiSSi‘m contmller 0f BU J
multiple inﬂatable demonstration units, proposed by the \
authors’ group. The device complex is named ‘SIMPLE’ Camera OfBU '
(Space Inﬂatable Membrane structures Pioneering _
Long-term Experiments). SIMPLE is designed to be suitable **._
for one of the shared experimental installations that constitute
a single experimental block attached to the Exposed Facility T
of Kibo Japanese Experimental Module (JEM) of 188
(International Space Station). comm] Unit 0f IST
The authors’ group proposed SIMPLE in February last
year, and the proposal was accepted by JAXA at the year end. _
SIMPLE is the candidate of the secondary application of the ‘
Exposed Facility of JEM now. SIMPLE Will share one T
Exposed Facility Unit (EFU) of the facility With four other (2) Interior
planned mission deViCeS. The lallheh Of the EFU by the Fig. 2. Concept of mission device complex after deployment
H-IIA/HTV is tentatively scheduled in 2011.
2. Objectives of On-Orbit Veriﬁcation
The objectives of this planned inﬂatable experiment are:
( 1) to verify the concepts of space inﬂatable structures by
demonstrating their key technologies, (2) to present and
demonstrate the applicability of inﬂatable structures, (3) to
To_2

"
"3","T. AOKI et al.: On-Orbit Veriﬁcation of Space Inﬂatable Structures
a. ‘_--_ \ ,H’lg . _ _
. \K __ = _ er"" _ 1500 __ 5m) _
b\J ‘. ' : fr""
it Dr LH. I DI
Fig. 3. Concept of mission device complex in launch conﬁguration 3 -_— 6 -—§ E
- 5”“ - . EUDD .
SIMPLE is composed of ﬁve units, i.e. the Bus Unit (BU), the
Power Unit (PU), the Inﬂatable Extension Mast (IEM), the Fig. 4. Major dimension of SIMPLE
Inﬂatable Material Experimental Panel (IMP), and the Inﬂatable
Space Terrarium (IST). Table 1. Speciﬁcation of SIMPLE
The BU consists of the mission controller, the mission sensors Item Speciﬁcation
including the cameras, the system monitors, and the package. Dimension 500me 300mmD x 500mmH
The PU provides the electric power to the other four units. The + 500mmW X 200mmD X 300mmH
IEM, IMP, and IST are stowed within the compact package in Weight 50kg
the launch conﬁguration. This package is planned to be ﬁxed to Power Typical 6OW= Max 90W= Standby 50W
the EFU together with other experimental installations. Once in (28VDC X 10h)
orbit, the experimental rnission sequence starts with the gﬁﬁhreate 2:311:11 X 500mm X 2000mm (IBM is
extension of the IBM. This is followed by a series of . . .
. . . extended dur1ng nnss1on)
experiments conducted in the IMP, and the IST, all of Wthh are Direction of -X direction (opposite to the ﬂight of 188)
based on the inﬂatable space technologies. The minimum deployment
success criterion is fulﬁlled with the extension of the IBM, Strength/Stiffness Tolerantto:
driven by the inﬂatable tube systern implanted in the multiple 1, Launch level ofH-IIB/HTV
stern—type integrated closed section beam. 2. 0.2G in arbitrary direction on Exposed
The major dimension of SIMPLE is shown in Fig.4. The Facility OfJEM
speciﬁcation is given in Table 1, which agree With the design Thermal control Combination of active control by heater and
requirement given by JAXA. The power is supplied by the bus paSSiVe contml
system of the EFU (EFU-BUS) that is provided by JAXA. The Missionlife2~3years—
heater with thermostat and the communication line are also
supplied by the EFU-BUS.
The design had been modiﬁed again and again after the 4' Overview Of Mission
authors’ group proposed SIMPLE to JAXA. Major reasons are
the budget and the development period. The other one is the The authors’ group has the plan to achieve three experiments
loading condition, i.e. 0.2G (times the safety factor) in arbitrary With SIMPLE’ each Of WhiCh corresponds to the IEM’ the IMP’
direction. The ﬁrst two had driven the simpliﬁcation of the and the IST, respectively. Each experiment is summarized in the
system and the reduction of the variety of the experiments. The following subsections.
last one had driven the design reﬁnement of IBM. In addition,
the design should take into account the hazard analysis results 4°1° Inﬂatable Extension Mast (IEM)
and the system should have sufﬁcient reliability. Furthermore, The IBM is the extensible rnast that is the advanced model Of
the deployed devices, i.e. IEM, IMP, and IST should be stored the SPINAR. As mentioned in Introduction, the SPINAR has
into the BU when the on-orbit veriﬁcation is completed and already been practically used in space. However, the capability
SIMPLE is stowed back into the HTV. These requirements to the long-term mission, e.g. several years, has not been
result in the introduction of the redundant system with high examined in space yet. Moreover, the loading condition shown
reliability. Thus the design ended up to be rather conservative. in Table 1 is quite severe for slender ﬂexible body. Therefore,
The devices, which are intrinsically unnecessary for the pure the authors’ group developed the ‘Mu—SPINAR’ that stands for
deployment, have eventually been added. But the authors’ group rnulti-STEM SPINAR The developed Mu—SPINAR consists Of
believes that SIMPLE is still challenging and important to the three triaxially woven fabrics (TWF). The cross-section forms a
r es earch and development ofinﬂatabl e structures. near-circular section, and the neighboring two TWF is connected
with the Velcro. Thus the IBM, i.e. the Mu—SPINAR has the
closed cross-section, so that it has high stiffness and strength
against the static acceleration load. The photo of the BBM of the
IBM is shown in Fig.5.

The mission of the IBM is to extend the mast to the speciﬁed
length, to monitor the secular change of the shape and the
stiffness, and to verify the long-terrn survivability. The change in

To_3

"
"4","Trans. J SASS Space Tech. Japan Vol. 7, No. ists26 (2009)
basic characteristics is monitored by using the camera and
accelerometer. IBM is equipped with mechanical retraction #
system which operates after all the experiments are completed.
The retraction system has negative inﬂuence on the intrinsically
simple deployment system, bringing in the complication and
additional weight to the device. However the beneﬁts of
long-tenn monitoring of the IBM on 188 well overcome these \
demerits.
‘ I ' (1) Schematic
—— l 260
130 —operp|ate Multi-cellplate Heattransfersheet
—__ j 2
' MU I—_—!‘li
l/i——I\ U M '
/!--|\
- 'I ‘ Wire
_ ‘2 Platelet
_ N ll--|\
\
(l) Stored (2) Under extension (3) Extended /‘--|\
- Conston spring
Flg. 5. BBM ofIEM ﬂ
Lower COV:-r “PH“ ﬁaﬁgl I Guide ro||er
. . .. .-| m wwl’
4.2. Inﬂatable MaterialExperimentalPanel (IMP) ""'-“ ""—""' LM Ill
The IMP is the deployable panel on which the material 280
available for inﬂatable structures is attached. The mission of the '“f'OW Piping OUtf'OW Piping
IMP is on-orbit veriﬁcation and the monitoring of the secular (2) Conﬁguration
change of the materials exposed to space. The materials include
UV hardening polymer and shape memory polymer. The Fig. 6. Concept ofIST
condition of the exposed material is monitored mainly by the
camera.
4.3. Inﬂatable S'pace Terranum (IST) . . lﬁ==ﬂ
The current des1gn of IST is shown in Fig. 6. The major __
mission of the IST is to verify the long-term (~siX months) /‘--|\
retaininent of pressurized membrane structure. Such pressurized /‘--|\ I!==g\
membrane structures which can roduce seudo-atinos heric E——:‘
. . p p p /‘--|\ III—_I\\
enVironInent on orbit are called Space Terrarium. /‘--|\ Ii==5‘\
There are three challenges in IST. The ﬁrst one is the IIE-—I\\
evaluation of the debris-tolerant characteristics of the /‘--l|\ k==gk
inulti-cellular inﬂatable plate15 ), and the second one is that of the ...E;... ---——---
platelet membrane structure. The latter one consists of the inner After deployment Before deployment
inﬂatable membrane and the outer shell composed of platelets
that resist the debris. Figure 7 illustrates the concept of the .
deployment of the platelet membrane. Flg. 7. Deployment of platelet membrane
The ﬁnal challenge is to verify the long-term (~siX Inonths)
retaininent of pressurized membrane structure in which the 5' Schedule
atmospheric environment is simulated. The ﬁnal mission is to . .
c on du ct the g erinin ati on eX p eriin ent and to eV alu at e the Along With the reV1ews of the EFU system, the stand-alone
characteristics of the highly pressurized inﬂatable structure as reviews Of SIMPLE pI‘OJGCt W111. be held. at the appropriate
the simple gre enhous e The c onditi on of the structure is t11n1ngs.The tentative schedule untillaunchis shown1n Table 2.
monitored by using the inner cameras and the pressure sensors. Less than 2 Years are 'left to cleliver “completed SIMPLE to
The biological condition is monitored by using the 02 or the €02 JAXA. Intensive des1gn1ng and integrating efforts must be well
s en s or the humidity s en s ors and the thermal s en s ors scheduled and executed to accomplish the whole pI‘OJCCt under
9 9 given time frame.
Tc_4

"
"5","T. AOKI et a1.: On-Orbit Veriﬁcation of Space Inﬂatable Structures
Table 2_ Schedule 10) Furuya, H. and Nakahara, M.: A Concept of Retractable Inﬂatable
W Tubes, 25th International Symposium on Space Technology and
FY2008— Science (ISTS), ISTS 2006-c-03 (2006).
W 11) Sogane, A. and Furuya, H.: Conceptual Study on Cylindrical
System Requirement Review Deployable Space Structures, IUTAM—IASS Symposium on
June System D eﬁnition Review Deployable Structures: T heory and Applications, Kluwer Academic
I (Preliminary D esi gn) Publishers, SMIA .80, 2000, pp.383ﬂ-392. . .
S eptemb er Preliminary D esign Review 12) Sakamoto, H., Ish1mura, K., Natorl, MfC' and H1guch1, K.: Concepts
I EM fabrication, integration and test of Redundant Space Structures Usmg Mu1t1-Ce11u1ar Inﬂatable
FY2009— Elements, 11th International Conference on Adaptive Structures and
+ Technologies, Nagoya, 2000.
Jllme 8:21:13 Review 13) Furuya, H., Nakahara, M., Murata, S. and Takadama, K.: Deployment
I PFM fabrication, integration and test Characteristics of Multi-Cellular Inﬂatable Tubes, Proc. 5 7th
FY2010— gifrnational Astronautical Congress (IAC), IAC-06-C2.2.10 (2006),
+ a enela.
I (Mamtenance des1gn) . . 14) Sakamoto, H., Natori, MC. and Miyazaki, Y.: Deﬂection of
September Development Completlon ReV1eW Multicellular Inﬂatable Tubes for Redundant Space Structures,
% Journal ofSpacecrafl and Rockets, 39 (2002), pp.695-700.
mé 15) Ishimura, K. and Higuchi, K.: Multi-Cellular Inﬂatable Structures
September Launch Readmess RGVIGW Originating from Tensegrity Systems, Proc. Space Structures and
Launch— Materials Symposium (2005), pp.51-55.
16) Furuya, H., Nakahara, M., Murata, S., Jodoi, D., Terada, Y. and
6. Conclusion Takadama, K.: Concept of Inﬂatable Tensegrity for Large Space
Structures, AIAA-2006-1700 (2006), Proc.
The authors’ group has proposed an on-orbit space AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 4 7th Structures, Structural Dynamics
, , , , , and Materials Conference, Newport.
verlﬁcatlon exper1menta1dev1ce complex composed of multlple 17) Hashimoto, M., Kishimoto, N., Miyazaki, Y. and Natori, M.C.
inﬂatable demonstration units. The mission is named SIMPLE. Numerical Analysis on Deployment Behavior Of Membrane Structure
SIMPLE was accepted by JAXA as the secondary application of Systems, Proc. 2006 ASME International Mechanical Engineering
the Exposed Facility 0f JEM. The SIMPLE mission will be a C?”g_’”eSS andExPOSl-llion (2006)» Chicago.
very important step to promote the practical use of inﬂatable 18) KIShlmOtO’ N"" Naton’ M'C"" ngucm’ K' ahd Ukegawa, K': N.€W
Deployable Membrane Structure Models Insplred by Morphologlcal
SthtureS- Changes in Nature, AIAA-2006-1898 (2006), Proc.
AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 47th Structures, Structural Dynamics
Acknowledgement and Materials Conference, Newport.
The authors express sincere gratitude to JAXA for partial 19) Hammad“ Y' Mlyazakl Y' and Nakamura= Y': Deployment
Dynamlcs Of a Rolled-up Inﬂatable Tube, 24th Internatlonal
support Of the current research. Symposium on Space Technology and Science (ISTS), ISTS 04-c-13
(2004), pp.297—302.
References 20) Hamamoto, Y. and Miyazaki, Y.: Stable Deployment of Rolled-up
Inﬂatable Tube by Control of Gas Flow, IAC-03-I.2.07 (2003), Proc.
1) Freeland, R.E., Bilyeu, G.D., Veal, GR. and Mikulas, M.M.: 5 4lh_1”lemali0”al A?” onaulical C0”? 6” (1’40” pp.1-6. _
Inﬂatable Deployable Space Structures Technology Summary, 21) A610, T. and Yosh1da, K.: Mechamcal an<1 Thermal B-ehaV10rs 0f
IAF-98—I.5.01 (1998), pp.1-16. Tnax1a11y- Woven Carbon/Epoxy Fabr1c Compos1te, AIAA
2) Wilde, D. and Walther, S.: Inﬂatable Reentry and Descent ""20064688 (2006)” Proc. 47th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC
Technology (IRDT) _ Further Developments, 2nd International Structures, Slruclttral Dynamics and Materials Conference, Newpott.
Symposium of Atmospheric Reentry Vehicles and Systems (2001), 22) Yoshlda, K1, Aek1, T. and Watanabe, A.: Nonhnear Tens11e BeheV10r
pp.1-9. of 2-D Tr1aX1a11y Woven Fabrlc Compos1te, 25th Internatlonal
3) http://www.bigelowaerospace.com/out_there/genesis_1.php Symposium on Space Technology and Science (1818)” ISTSO6'C'19
4) Natori, M. Higuchi, K., Sekine, K. and Okazaki, K.: Advanced (2906)“ _ _ _ _
Concepts of Inﬂatable Rigidized Structures for Space Applications, 23) M1yazak1 Y“ and UChﬂﬂ’ M“: Deployment dynam1cs Of Inﬂatable
AIAA-94-1473-CP (1994), Proc. AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 35th W96» AIAA'2002'1254 (2002)» PW- 4144/
Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference, Hilton ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 43rd Structures, Structural Dynamics, and
Head. Materials Conference, Denver.
5) Natori, M.C., Higuchi, K., Sekine, K. and Okazaki, K.: Adaptivity 24) Watanaba» K» HigPChi= K_-= Watanaba» A» Yamakawa» H- and
Demonstration of Inﬂatable Rigidized Integrated Structures (IRIS), Tsunoda, H': Ultra'hght W6_1ght Inﬂatable Actuated ROd for Antenna
A cla Astron aulic a, 37 (1995), pp.59-67. Extendable Along Spm AXIS, IAC-06-C2.P.1.10 (2006), Proc. 5 7th
6) Higuchi, K., Natori, M.C., Hatta, H. and Yokota, R.: Inﬂatable Space International Aslronaulz’cal Congress HAG)” Valenc1a.
Rigidized Structure: Adaptivity and Fundamental Experiment, 20th 25) nguchl, K"" WataPab€= K” Watanabe, A” TSUPOdav H“ end
International Symposium on Space Technology and Science (ISTS), Yamakawa, H.: Des1gn and Evaluat1on of an Ultra-hght Extend1b1e
ISTS 96-b-11V (1996). Mast as an Inﬂatable Structure, AIAA2006-1809 (2006), Proc.
7) Senda, K., Oda, T., Ohta, S., Igarashi, Y., Watanabe, A., Hori, T., Ito, AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 4 7th Structures, Structural Dynamics,
H., Tsunoda, H. and Watanabe, K.: Deploy Experiment of Inﬂatable and Materials Conference, Newport. _
Tube using Work Hardening, AIAA-2006-1808 (2006), Proc. 26) Watanabe» K» Watanabe» A; ngUCh1= Ky TSUPOda= _H- 311d
AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 4 7th Structures, Structural Dynamics Yamakawa, H“: StruWral D659“ Of Ultre-nghtwelght Spln AXIS
an d Materials C0nference,Newp0rt. Extendable Mast Usmg Inﬂat1on Extens10n Method, Proc. 56th
8) Ishizawa, Shimamura, Minami, Imagawa, Hayashi, Miwa, and International Astronautical Congress (IAC), IAC-05-C.2.1.B.07
Hayashi: New Actuator Using Shape-Memory Polymer for Space (2005)” Fukuoka.
Use, IAC-05-C2.4 (2005), Proc. 54th International Astronautical
Congress (IA C), Fukuoka.
Tc_5

"
