"","x"
"1","MICROBIOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY REVIEWS, June 2004, p. 345—361 Vol. 68, N0. 2
1092-2172/04/$08.00+0 DOI:10.1128/MMBR.68.2.345—361.2004
Copyright © 2004, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Mlcroblal Responses to Mlcro graV1ty and Other
LOW-Shear Env1r0nments
Cheryl A. Nickerson,” C. Mark Ott,2 J ames W. Wilson,1 Rajee Ramamurthy,1 and Duane L. Pierson3
Program in Molecular Pathogenesis and Immunity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,1 and EASI/Wyle Laboratories2 and Habitabilily
and Environmental Factors Oﬁice,3 NASA-Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 77058
Mechanosensitive Processes in Mlcroorganlsms346
Microgravity and Low Fluid Shear 346
Why Study the Effects of Microgravity 0n Microorganisms? 346 U
EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROBIAL RESPONSES: EXPERIMENTS INVOLVING g
Brief History of Microbial Experiments Involving Spaceﬂlght347 8
Summary of Results from Selected Spaceﬂight Experiments 347 Q.
GROUND-BASED MODELS OF MICROGRAVITY: EFFECT OF MICROGRAVITY ANALOGUES 8
ON MICROBIAL RESPONSES 348 :4.
Rotating-Wall Vessel Culture Apparatus and the Low-Shear Modeled Microgravity (LSMMG) 0
Growth Env1r0nment349 3
Responses of Bacteria t0 LSMMG351 g
Altered secondary-metabolite product10n351 '9
Enhanced Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium Vlrulence351 Q
Altered stress resistance and examination of LSMMG responses in an S. enterica serovar g
Typhimurium rpoS mutant 352 0'
Altered growth kinetics 353 7‘
LSMMG regulon and evidence for Fur as a potential regulator of the S. enterica serovar 8
Typhimurium LSMMG response353 3
Responses of Yeast t0 LSMMG354 2
HOW DO CELLS RESPOND TO MICROGRAVITY, MICROGRAVITY ANALOGUES, AND (3
OTHER LOW-SHEAR ENVIRONMENTS? 355 0
Inﬂuence of Fluid Shear Force on Cellular Physiology 355 3
Mechanisms T0 Sense Deformation of the Cell Membrane 356 5%,
Molecular Model for Microbial “Sensing” of Microgravity and LSMMG357 3:5
Is There a Dedicated Gravitational Sensor Mechanism in Microbes? 359 9)
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS359 Q
— 3
n n n N
INTRODUCTION due to Changes 1n mechanlcal and/or phys1cal forces are also 0'
Microbial existence and survival requires the ability to sense becomlhg mereasmgly epparent (6’ 21’ 50’ 82’ 97)’ Recently, CO
. . . . several 1mp0rtant studles have demonstrated a key role for C
and respond to env1r0nmental Changes, 1nclud1ng Changes 1n . . . . . . CD
. . . . . . . mlcrograwty and the low ﬂuld shear dynamlcs assoaated Wlth m
phys1cal forces. Th1s 1s because mlcrobes 1nhab1t an amazmgly . . . . . . . .—.-
diverse range of ecological niches and therefore must con- mlcrograwty 1n the regulatlon Of mlcroblal gene expresswn,
. . . . physiology, and pathogenesis (22, 54, 60, 78, 82). The mech-
stantly adapt to a Wlde varlety 0f Changlng env1r0nmental con- , , ,
ditions including alterations in temperature pH nutrient anosensory response Of mlcroorganlsms to these env1r0nmen-
- ’- - - ’ ’ - tal signals, Which are relevant to those encountered during
avallablhty, oxygen levels, and osmotlc pressure gradlents (2, , , , , , , , ,
15, 32, 44, 46, 86). Microbes sense their environment through mlcroblel 11fe cycles. on Earth, may pr0V1de.1.n51ght 1nt0 then
a variety of sensors and receptors Which serve to integrate the edaptatmns t0 phy51616glcelly relevant condttlone and may ul-
different signals into the appropriate cellular response(s) that tlmately lead to eludlcldat16n 9f the .mechanlsms. ImPQrtant for
is Optimal for survival. While numerous environmental stimuli mechanosensory transductlon .1n 11V1ng cells. Th1s reVICW eum-
have been examined for their effect on microorganisms effects marlzes the recent and potentlal future research trends almed
’ at understanding the effect of Changes in mechanical forces
that occur in microgravity and other IOW-shear environments
—. . . . . on different microbial parameters. The results of these studies
* Correspondlng author. Malhng address: Department Of Mlcrobl- rovide an im ortant ste towar d understandin hOW microbes
Ology and Immunology, SL38, Tulane University School Of Medicine, p , p , p , , g , ,
1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA 70112-2699. Phone: (504) 988- 1ntegrate 1nf0rmat10n from multlple mechanlcal stlmull to an
4609. Fax: (504) 588-5144. E-mail: cnicker@tulane.edu. appropriate physiological response.
345

"
"2","346 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
Mechanosensitive Processes in Microorganisms For example, how much Change occurs and What form Will
, , , organisms assume over time in the microgravity environment
, Mlcrobes have the ab111ty to sense and respond to mechan- of spaceﬂight? Research conducted in the microgravity enVi-
1ca1 st1mu11. The response of mlcrobes to certa1n mechanlcal ronment of space as well as the use of ground-based micro-
st1mu11 has profound effects. on phys1ology (40’ 82’ 97)‘ The gravity analogues, has demonstrated that microbial cells are
response of a cell to mechanlcal st1mu1atlon, such as stretch or “hardwired” to respond to changes in this physical force (22’
shear force, is.call.ed mechanotransduction and is important 60, 78, 82). Although microgravity and microgravity analogues
for cell protectlon 1n bOth prokaryotes and eukaryotes (40’ ,48’ are known to have a profound effect on numerous microbial
49)‘ A great deal Of Progress has been made 1n understandlng parameters, the mechanism(s) by Which this occurs is unknown
certa1n aspects of mlcroblal mechanotransductlon, for exam- (22’ 60, 78, 82).
ple, mechanisms used by bacter1a to respond to changes 1n Microgravity, used as a research tool, allows investigators to
051110th gradlents (7’ 40’ 85)‘ Recently, stud1es have also do?"" understand how Changes in this dynamic physical force affect
umented that .mlcrobes can sense and respond to changes 1n microbes at the molecular, physiological, and evolutionary lev-
Cuupre cond1t10nswhen grown 1n the buoyant, low-ﬂuld-shear els. As we transition from terrestrial life to low-graVity enVi-
enV1ronment Of, mlcrograV1ty (21’ 52’ 60’ 82)‘ Moreover, It has ronments, our understanding of the role of gravity in shaping U
been hypothes1zed that cells sense Changes 1n mechanlcal evolution on Earth Will increase. This is especially relevant g
forces, 1nclud1ng shear and graV1ty, at the1r cell surface (48)' given the ambitious neW focus and Vision for the future of 2
While changes in the physical forces of hydrostatic pressure, America’s space exploration program, Which calls for “extend- 8
gravity, and ﬂuid shear play an important role in evolution and ing the human presence across our Solar System,” including a Q.
microbial physiology, Iittle is knoyvn about how microbial cells living bas e on the Mo on and missions to Mars. Microgravity 8
eonvert these mechanlcal s1gna1s 1nto molecular and blochem- investigations using microbes With short generation times may 3“
lcal responses. Abetter understandlng of the mechanosensory reveal common characteristics shared by higher organisms, 3
response. of microorganisms to Changes in physieal forces Will including humans, that allow adaptation and survival in low 3'
prov1de 1mportant 1ns1ght intothe mechanlsms 1mportant for gravity and Will provide important insight into how terrestrial %
mechanosensory transductlon 1n 11V1ng CCHS' life adapts on Earth. Moreover, since microgravity represents a §
profound Change in physical forces encountered by cells, the g
Microgravity and Low Fluid Shear use of microbes in these studies may provide clues to the 2-
underlying mechanisms responsible for the physiological adap- in
Mechanical culture conditions in the quiescent microgravity tations that humans experience in space. Such information Will (1)
environment 0f spaceﬂight are characterized by signiﬁcant re- lead to the advancement of our knowledge regarding cellular 3
ductions in ﬂuid shear (41, 60). This is because convection adaptations Which may occur in outer space beyond this plan- 3
currents are essentially absent in microgravity (60, 61)- Like- et’s gravitational ﬁeld. In addition, just as the study of micro- \
Wise, cells cultured in specialized ground-based bioreactors bial life in extreme enVironments on Earth has led to novel 3
designed t0 simulate aspects 0f weightlessness in the labora- biological solutions to complex medical, environmental, and 9%
tory encounter a low-shear modeled microgravity environment agricultural problems, the investigation of microbial life in the 3
(42, 58, 82)- Thus, both microgravity and ground-based micro- microgravity enVironment of space and ground-based mi- CT)
gravity analogues represent a low-shear stress enVironment for crograVity analogues holds signiﬁcant potential for future ‘2
cell culture. Accordingly, it is relevant that both of these me- academic and commercial applications. Indeed, the unique 8
Chanical culture conditions be considered together in this re- research environment Of microgravity has already shown he. “M
View, especially since recent studies have demonstrated an tential to enhance the efficiency of terrestrial fermentation 3
important role for microgravity and the low-ﬂuid-shear dynam- processes Which use microbes to produce commercial products N
ics associated With microgravity in the regulation Of a variety 0f such as antibiotics (59). The economic beneﬁt derived from g
microbial parameters (60, 78, 82)- Understanding hOW micro- such knowledge could be substantial and might serve to initiate to
gravity and hhid shear stress affect microorganisms may ad- a neW era of bioprocessing. Finally, it is important to note that g
vance our understanding of the fundamental concepts of mech- the growth environment sensed during the microgravity Of (.9.-
anotransduction, including the discovery of mechanisms Which spaceﬂight and during ground-based microgravity analogue
might be conserved between microbes and humans. culture has distinct similarities to enVironments encountered
by microbial cells on Earth. Speciﬁcally, the low-shear-stress,
Why Study the Effects of Microgravity 0n Microorganisms? low-turbulence environment Of microgravity and microgravity
analogue culture 1s s1m11ar to that found 1n certa1n areas of the
Microgravity is a condition Where the physical force of graV- body. For example, a low-shear enVironment like that of mi-
ity is reduced and is often referred to as “weightlessness.” crograVity is encountered in utero and in the protected enVi-
Because life on Earth evolved in the presence of gravity, one of ronment between the brush border microvilli of epithelial cells
the fundamental organizing forces of evolution, it is of prime (3, 12, 20, 39, 90). The latter enVironment is relevant to that
interest to understand the effect of this force on the evolution encountered by numerous microbial pathogens and commen-
of terrestrial life. By conducting studies in the reduced gravity sals during their normal life cycles in the gastrointestinal, re-
of spaceﬂight, we may gain a better understanding of how the spiratory, and urogenital tracts. In addition, there may be other
physical force of gravity shaped life on Earth. In addition, the low-shear enVironments that are occupied by microbes and are
results of spaceﬂight studies Will lead to the discovery of other not presently known. Thus, the parallels between microgravity
features of terrestrial life that cannot be observed on Earth. and certain Earth environments Will help us understand the

"
"3","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 347
TABLE 1. Detailed reviews of spaceﬂight experiments with microorganisms
Description Reference
Detailed discussion of early space through 1974, covering ﬂight observations including lunar exploration missions and
astronaut microbial ﬂora 95
Comprehensive listing of all spaceﬂight experiments with microorganisms through 199022
Detailed discussion of mycological studies performed during ﬂight though 1990104
Discussion summarizing the organisms which have ﬂown and a synopsis of the results through 1991 Clolett1 et al.“
Organized synopsis of organisms, missions, and results, as well as perspective on limitations of ﬂight and ﬂight experiments..........................78
Recent and thorough reView of ﬂight experiments, with insight into the proposed mechanisms behind the effects observed
in microgravity 60
a L. A. Cioletti, D. L. Pierson, and S. K. Mishra, Abstr. 21st Int. Conf. Environ. Syst., abstr. 911512, 1991.
response of microbes to these environmental signals, which are USSR was investigating microbial growth and Viability Charac-
similar to those encountered during microbial life cycles, and teristics during ﬂights as early as 1957, with experiments
may provide insight into microbial adaptations to physiologi- aboard the Sputnik satellites (40). They continued their work Q
cally relevant conditions. in rocket-launched experiments in 1960 with the second Soviet 5
satellite (Sputnik 5) (12). While the United States completed %
EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROBIAL mlcroblal experlments 1n satellltes, such as D1scoverer XVII 8
RESPONSES: EXPERIMENTS INVOLVING and Blosatelhte 2 (12), the Natlonal Aeronautlcs- and Space 8
SPACEFLIGHT Admlnlstratlon (NASA) also began experlments 1n the mld- _h
1960s, utilizing the manned Gemini spacecraft (40), which per- 8
Spaceﬂight represents a unique inhabited semiclosed enVi- mitted greater experimental interaction and complexity. The 3
ronment, most notably characterized by a decreased gravita— Soviet and subsequent Russian efforts continued through the g
tional force. Moreover, human presence in space, whether per- Salyut and Mir programs through the 1990s (12, 40). US. '9.
manent or transient, is accompanied by the presence of microbes. experiments likewise continued during the Apollo, Skylab, and E
Evaluations Of the microbial CCOlOgy aboard MIT and the IIl- Spacelab programs (12’ 40) Joint projects between these and 3
ternational Space Station suggested a predominance 0f com- other partner countries have been accomplished throughout 2'
mon members 9f the environmental ﬂora (14), although the the 1980s and 1990s and are currently ongoing aboard the in
appearance 9f medically signiﬁcant organisms has been docu- International Space Station. The results of these experiments, 3
mented (83)- Whether we are considering the true weightless- as described below, have provided compelling evidence that b
ness 9f deep space or the microgravity observed in low-Earth spaceﬂight profoundly alters a variety of microbial properties. a
orbit, it would be reasonable to predict that the microgravity- 3
induced decrease in stress on the surface of microorganisms 3
might affect the gene expression and physiology of both com- Summary of Results from Selected 9L,
mensal and pathogenic organisms. For successful space travel, Spaceﬂight Experiments 2
it is critical to address this issue, since studies have suggested 93
that spaceﬂight negatively impacts the immune system in both The overall number 0f microorganisms that have been in- 2
humans and animals (65, 94), which would lead to an increased vestigated during spaceﬂight is extensive, with over 100 diﬂer- 8
risk of infectious disease. ent experimental cultures being evaluated before 1990 (12). “N
These ﬁndings, as well as the convenience of handling and ThiS ICViCW provides only a general summary of past experi- 3
short life cycle of microorganisms, mean that bacteria and ments. Detailed reviews of the data and its implications have N
yeast are excellent research tools for ﬂight, although imple- been compiled and are listed in Table 1 (17, 22, 60, 78, 95, 104)- g
mentation of microbial experiments during ﬂight can be difﬁ- Basic microbial Characteristics, such as Changes in cell growth (Q
cult. The performance of any ﬂight experiment is restricted Characteristics during ﬂlght, have bCCIl repeatedly evaluated. g
by limitations in power, work area mass, and crew time (78). Changes in cell density were reported in early studies, includ- $9..
Safety concerns for the crew in a Closed environment increase ing the increased 56111710716110 enterica serovar Typhimurium
the need for multiple containment of growing microbial cul- culture densities during experiments aboard Biosatillite 2 com-
tures. In addition, the lack of gravity complicates techniques pared t0 ground controls (95)- Escherichia C05 also displayed
requiring proper gas/liquid/solid-phase separation. These lim- similar increased growth during ﬂight in several experiments
itations often restrict the experimental design to simple, basic (16, 57, 103)- T0 further clarify the differences observed in bac-
approaches with minimal replicates. terial growth kinetics during spaceﬂight compared to ground
controls, a recent series of experiments was designed to exam-
Brief History of Microbial Experiments ine in detail the growth of E. (3011' during ﬂight (57). The results
Involving Spaceﬂight of th1s stndy 1ndlcated that the lag phase was shortened, the
exponentlal growth phase was extended, and the bacterlal cell
Initial spaceﬂight experiments with microorganisms can be populations were 88% greater than those of ground controls
traced back to early efforts including balloon ﬂights and Aer- (57). A subsequent set of experiments conﬁrmed this ﬁnding
obee rocket payloads (22, 78). Ballooning experiments dated as for both E. coli and Bacillus subtilis (54, 55). Potential mech-
early as 1935 evaluated the ability of microorganisms to sur- anisms that could explain the differences in microbial growth
Vive decreased pressure and increased radiation (22, 78). The parameters observed during spaceﬂight have not been eluci-

"
"4","348 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.

dated, although several possibilities have been proposed (57). have also been reported in-ﬂight. Interestingly, the D. discoi—

For microorganisms, most proposed mechanisms focus on phys- deum fruiting bodies from the ﬂight experiments produced

ical factors, such as decreased mass diffusion or shear levels or fewer spores that germinated later than those of ground con-

the development of “microenvironments” (i.e., Changes in the trol cultures (93). Other notable observations during cell cul-

distribution of nutrients and by-products due to a lack of cell tivation during ﬂight include greater cell size and enhanced

sedimentation) directly around the organism, that could alter swarming of Proteus vulgaris (70), a thickening of the cell wall

cell growth. The difference between these indirect effects and of S. aureus (64), increased phosphate uptake of S. cerevisiae

the possible direct eﬂects of microgravity were clariﬁed dur- (104), impaired magnetotaXis of Magnetospirillium magneto-

ing a ﬂight experiment by Kacena et al. in which E. coli and tacticum (102), increased antibiotic production by Streptomyces

B. subtilis were grown on agar to minimize any physical ﬂuid plicatus and Humicola fuscoatm (by as much as 115 and 190%,

effects (53). N o diﬂerence in growth was observed compared to respectively) (59), and morphological Changes in hyphal struc-

the ground control, suggesting that the indirect physical effects, ture, colony development, and cell shape in Trychophyton ter-

such as Changes in ﬂuid dynamics and extracellular transport, restre and Chaetomium globosum (104).

rather than a direct gravity effect was the most likely cause of Numerous in-ﬂight studies have conﬁrmed that spaceﬂight

the differences seen in bacterial growth during spaceﬂight (53). has a profound effect on a variety of microbial parameters, U
Of particular interest to NASA are Changes to key microbial including Changes in microbial growth, morphology, metabo- g

characteristics during ﬂight that can directly impact the health, lism, genetic transfer, and Viral reactivation. However, inherent 2

safety, and performance of the crew and/or affect the integrity in-ﬂight experimental limitations and some inconclusive ﬁnd- 8

of the spacecraft. One such series of investigations studied ings have prevented our thorough understanding of the mech- %

differences in antibiotic resistance proﬁles of microrganisms anisms underlying these microbial responses. While the C-

during space ﬂight. In 1982, as a part of the Cytos 2 experi- numerous restrictions associated with in-ﬂight experiments 3“

ment, the MIC of oxacillin, chloramphenicol, and erythromy- have limited the ability to obtain detailed data on exactly how 3

Cin for Staphylococcus aureus and of colistin and kanamycin for microorganisms respond to spaceﬂight at the molecular and 3

E. coli were compared to those of ground controls (98). Sur- biochemical levels, future spaceﬂight experiments that incor- '5

prisingly, the results indicated an increased resistance of both porate novel technology coupled with experiments using Q

S. aureus and E. coli to all antibiotics used in this experiment ground-based microgravity analogues (discussed below) will 3

(98). Similar analyses have been performed in subsequent provide us with important insight into the molecular mecha- 0'

ﬂight experiments to conﬁrm this effect, and they have repeat- nisms of microbial responses to microgravity and other low- a

edly shown increased antibiotic resistance in these organisms shear environments that are relevant to those encountered g

(64, 78). The mechanism for the increased resistance to anti- in-ﬂight and on Earth. This new era of in-ﬂight experiments is b

biotics in-ﬂight is unclear; however, this difference has been exempliﬁed by a current study by Nickerson et al., conducted a

speculated to be the result of the above-mentioned differences onboard the International Space Station (http://science.na- 3

in microbial growth kinetics or possibly a modiﬁcation of cel- sa.gov/headlines/y2004/23 feb_yeastgap.htm? list691352). This :5

lular transport mechanisms due to Changes in mass diffusion experiment will be the ﬁrst to use whole-genome microarrays 9%

(78, 98). Some mechanistic insight has come from recent ﬂight to globally proﬁle Changes in gene expression in a microorgan- 2:5

and MIC testing performed with E. coli grown on agar instead ism (S. cerevisiae) in response to spaceﬂight as compared to m

of in liquid culture (56). Under these conditions, no increased identical ground control cultures and will also generate a ﬁt- ‘2

antibiotic resistance to gentamicin was observed, suggesting a ness proﬁle of yeast genes that convey a selective growth ad- 8

physical rather than biological effect (56). The Changes in an- vantage in microgravity. “N

tibiotic sensitivity observed in these microbes during space- 3

ﬂ1ght may be trans1ent, s1nce attempts to reproduce the res1s- GROUND-BASED MODELS OF MICROGRAVITY: N

tance after return to Earth have beenunsuccessful (64). . EFFECT OF MICROGRAVITY ANALOGUES 2-
An extens1ye .11st of Changes 1n a w1de yar1ety of nucroblal ON MICROBIAL RESPONSES (Q

cell characterlstlcs has been observed dur1ng spaceﬂlght com- g

pared to ground controls. For example, the effect of spaceﬂight As discussed in the previous section, there are a number of $9..

on genetic transfer has been investigated numerous times and issues that make scientiﬁc experiments involving spaceﬂight

has indicated increased conjugal transfer rates in E. coli (16) particularly challenging. Such experiments require a signiﬁcant

and Changes in phage induction in E. coli and S. enterica sero- amount of preﬂight time and planning and rely on hardware

var Typhimurium (1, 72). While infection studies are limited that requires extensive engineering to meet the rigorous in-

due to ﬂight constraints concerning containment issues, some ﬂight standards that are put on any piece of equipment that is

studies have been completed. For example, Saccharomyces cere- ﬂown in space. Therefore, studies of the eﬂect of microgravity

Visiae cells retrieved from the Apollo 16 experiments were on microorganisms during spaceﬂight are limited by certain

better able to survive in intradermal lesions in artiﬁcially in- constraints involved with these experiments. These constraints

fected mice compared to ground controls (104). Several studies include: power, weight, volume, and stowage space limitations;

have also indicated increased Viral reactivation in astronauts in time and labor requirements placed on the astronauts; limited

response to spaceﬂight; the Viruses studied included Epstein- ﬂight opportunities; signiﬁcant ﬁnancial costs; and the need

Barr Virus (91), cytomegalovirus (76), and varicella-zoster Virus for specialized equipment necessary to perform experiments

(75). In addition, intercellular functions, such as bioﬁlm for- aboard spacecraft or space stations. Thus, there eXists a fun-

mation by Pseudomonas aemginosa (74) and Changes in the damental need to assess many experiments under the condi-

growth and diﬂerentiation of Dictyostelium discoideum (93), tions of ground-based modeled microgravity.

"
"5","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 349
TABLE 2. RWV bioreactors used for LSMMG cell culture“
Bioreactor nomenclatureb Image Characteristics
RCCS (rotary cell culture system) Aerated using hydrophobic membrane along one ﬂat cylin-
HARV (High-aspect ratio vessel or - der side; used for batch cultures
High-aspect rotating vessel) ' ..
RWB (r0tating-wall bioreactor) _
*
STLV (slow-turning lateral vessel) . “ » -- . Aerated using hydrophobic membrane from concentric U
IRWV (integrated r0tating-wall vessel) . "" 5; . core; used for batch cultures 6%
' ‘ o
“2.; us. 9)
’ C.
(D
Q.
:9
RCM (Rotary Culture Max) Aeration provided upstream of cylinder; closed medium 0
2% addition and removal capability; used for semibatch cul- 3
W “m , ﬂ tures; has been modiﬁed With sensor equipment a
* ‘ o
_.
(Q
\
Clinostat Simplest RWV format; variable aeration; center of rotation 8
, \_ at either the cylindrical axis or external to the vessel L
, Q)
\\»\ Q a':«‘\ m
\‘y’ 4“», \ ‘2
' [\D
90
— N
” Reprinted from reference 82 With permission. 3
b RCCS, STLV, and RCM photographs printed With permission from Synthecon, Inc., Houston, TeX. N
C—
‘<
Rotating-Wall Vessel Culture Apparatus and the Low-Shear gravitational vectors are randomized over the surface of the cg
Modeled Microgravity (LSMMG) Growth Environment cells. Under these culture conditions, the cells are maintained 8
. in suspension as the RWV is rotated and a sustained IOW-shear H‘
In an effort to des1gn a novel form of 10W-shear, 10W-turbu- . . .
. env1r0nment for cell growth 1s achleved (42, 58, 82). Exchange
lence suspens10n culture that could model aspects of space- , , (C , , ” , , ,
ﬂight (i e microgravity) the N AS A Biotechnology Group Of nutrients and locahzed m1X1ng 0f the microenvnonment 1s
b as e d at th ns 0 n S p a C e (E e nt e r in H oust 0 n T eX i nV e nt e d the: facilitated by the constant falling of the cells through the local
r0tating-wallvessel (RWV) culture apparatus (42’ 82, 89). The ﬂnld enV1r0nment and the gentle rotation of the culture me-
RWV is a powerful laboratory tool but is rather simple in dlum. A gas-perrneable membrane on one s1de Of the RWV
concept and design. Several variations of the apparatus eXist allows constant a1r enchange durlng gtOWth;
(Table 2). The RWV is essentially an Optimized form of sus- The hthd mechanlcs that affect OhJeCtS 1h the RWY have
pension culture and consists of a hollow disk or cylinder that is been evaluated In detail (42: 58: 82, 105)- Bas1cally, partlcles or
completely ﬁlled With medium (n0 bubbles, i.e., “zero head- cells in the RWV are in a state of constant ﬂuid suspension
space”) and rotates on an aXis parallel to the ground (and such that hydrodynamic forces Offset the gravitational sedi-
perpendicular to the gravitational force vector) (Fig. 1) (42, 58, mentation of the bacteria in the reactor, allowing the organism
82, 105). The result is solid-body rotation of the medium within to fall at a constant terminal velocity Without being allowed to
and a constant rotation normal to the gravitational ﬁeld that settle on the bottom of the apparatus (Fig. 1B) (42, 58, 82).
results in an environmental culture condition in Which the The solid-body rotation of the medium is believed to minimize

"
"6","350 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
A. aspects of the forces that affect growth in the RWV environ-
Gravity ment (33, 42, 58, 59, 61, 105).
There are two compelling reasons why the RWV growth
. .. . environment is a microgravity analogue. First, cells in the
(1) LSMMG (11) Normal graVIty RWV are maintained in a constant state of suspension in a
a ﬂuid environment such that they mimic the way in which ob-
! , jects would be suspended in true microgravity. Indeed, suspen-
'1“ Rotatlon . . . . .
s1on 1n a ﬂu1d enV1ronment 1s already used to model space
Rotation walks during astronaut training at J ohnson Space Center. As-
tronauts are submerged and suspended underwater in a pool to
practice repairs to be performed during actual space walks in
an effort to simulate the space environment. While these two
situations differ in a number of ways, the design of the RWV
takes advantage of the same concept by creating a state of
B. low-shear suspension where sedimentation is absent and tur- g
bulent motion is greatly minimized (42, 58, 59, 61). Although it E
(i) No rotation (or normal (ii) Rotation in LSMMG is true that the gravity force vector present in a liquid environ- 2
gI‘3Vity rotation) orientation ment on Earth is very diﬁerent in magnitude from that present 8
, ,. in the space atmosphere, the low-shear buoyant sensation eX- %
perienced in both environments is very similar. There is in- 0-
creasing evidence not only that entire organisms sense and 3“
respond physiologically to low-shear, buoyant environments 3
but also that cells respond at the molecular level to this enVi- 3
ronment (43, 52, 81, 106, 107). 13
Second, cellular responses observed in space have been ob- Q
served during culture in the RWV on Earth. The most dra- g
' ' matic of these responses is the formation of three-dimensional 0'
’ (3-D) tissue aggregates that structurally and functionally re- a
’ . .1 semble in Vivo tissues. In fact, RWV bioreactor technology was g
FIG. 1. Operating orientations of the RWV and the effect of RWV originally designed for the growth of suspension cultures of b
TOFetiOh on particle (miefehe) ShepehSieh- (A) The tWO operating mammalian cells under conditions of extremely low turbu- a
onentatlons 0f the RWV are depleted In the LSMMG onentatlon lence, which permits the generation of these 3-D diﬁerentiated \
(panel 1), the aX1s of rotatlon of the RWV 1s perpendlcular to the . . . . . . 0
direction of the gravity force vector. In the normal-gravity (or 1 X g) tlssue-llke assemblles Wthh model many aspects Of 1n VIVO 3
orientation (panel ii), the axis of rotation is parallel to the gravity human “551165 (34, 35, 101, 105)- Accordlngly, the 3'D aggre- 9%
vector. (B) Effect of RWV rotation on particle suspension. When the gates are physiologically relevant in Vitro tissue models and are 3
RWViS hetretatihg 0f 15 rotatihgthhe 1 X8 orientation (Peheli)athe currently being engineered for use in infectious-disease re- CT)
gggﬁfaflgi‘ggewg;Cilﬁlsebﬁgﬂeifmtﬁge1385321361811;S&tmggéng search, tissue transplantation, and other fundamental biomed- E)
rotating in the LSMMG position (panel ii), particles are continually 1cal appllcatlons (349 80’ 823’ 101; A' J' Carterson, C' M' 0“? “(J3
suspended in the medium. The medium within the RWV rotates as a M. S. Clark, C. R. Vanderburg, C. A. Nickerson, and M. J . [\D
Single body, and the sedimentation 0? the Partiele due to gravity iS Schurr, Abstr. 103rd Gen. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 2003; 3
:ﬁzzgtgstie.iiizzrfhiﬁrgezm”$3.139;22:21; asbr 13-11% 2003; H- WM 0- M- 0m K- Homer zu N
“216 microgravity. Panel B is not dizwn t 0 scale. trup, C. L. LeBlanc, D..L. Pierson, C. A. Nickerson, A. Nelso, g
and C. Moms, Abstr. F1fteenth Annu. Tulane Health 801. Res. (Q
Days, 2003; A, Meijer, J . Siekman, P. Roholl, and Os- g
sewararde, Abstr. Eur. Chlamydia Congr., 2000). The same $9..
turbulence and shear within the vessel based on the Stokes law 3-D aggregates also form in space, and, in fact, this phenom-
for ﬂow around spherical objects (36, 42, 99). The hydrody- enon was ﬁrst observed during culture of tissue cell suspen-
namic forces involved may include centrifugal, Coriolis, and sions on space missions (23, 47, 101). There are numerous
shear components (42, 58). A model developed by Gao et al. examples of different cell types and lineages forming 3-D ag-
(36) explains that shear force around a spherical bead in the gregates during culture in space aboard spacecraft and space
RWV increases primarily with either increased particle radius stations (23, 34, 47, 101). The fact that these novel 3-D aggre-
or increased particle density relative to the medium. Assuming gates are formed both in space and in the RWV culture appa-
that microbes react in a similar fashion to a spherical particle, ratus points to the similarities between the two growth enVi-
their size and density would suggest a minimal shear. Thus, the ronments.
low shear associated with cell growth in the RWV is most It is also relevant to mention that the growth environment
probably the result of a combination of ﬂuidic principals and achieved through optimized suspension culture in the RWV
gravitational factors. However, the precise individual contribu- provides low-shear growth cues similar to those encountered in
tion of these forces on particles or microbes in the RWV is not utero and in certain low-shear areas of the body such as be-
Clear and requires further research. We refer the reader to tween the brush border microvilli of epithelial cells (3, 12, 20,
some excellent reviews that extensively discuss the technical 39, 90). Comparisons of the in utero growth environment and

"
"7","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 351
the RWV environment have Obvious implications in possibly utility in the pharmaceutical, food, and bioprocessing indus-
explaining why tissue aggregates form in the RWV, since the tries.
low-shear suspension of cells and tissues in the two enVir0n- In these studies, production of the peptide antibiotics ceph-
ments is strikingly similar. In relation to microbes, the low- alosporin and microcin B17 and the polyketide macrolide rapa-
shear environment between brush border micrOVilli is probably mycin by Streptomyces clavuligems, E. coli, and Streptomyces
encountered by numerous bacterial pathogens during the nat- hygroscopicus, respectively, was shown to be inhibited by
ural course of infection of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and LSMMG whereas production of gramicidin S by Bacillus brevis
urogenital tracts. This may be a niche where the reduced shear was unaffected (26—30, 37). Interestingly, the latter ﬁnding with
serves as a signal to microbes that reside there. B. brevis indicates that LSMMG does not have a universally
Since the RWV apparatus provides a low-shear culture en- negative effect on secondary metabolism and suggests that
Vironment that simulates aspects of space (and therefore microbes respond t0 LSMMG in speciﬁc ways. The repressive
“models microgravity”), we have adopted the terminology effect of glycerol 0n gramicidin production by B. brevis nor-
LSMMG (low-shear modeled microgravity) to refer to the mally seen in shake ﬂasks was not Observed during culture in
RWV culture environment. Although designed to provide an the RWV (30)- Similarly, glucose repression 0f microcin 1317
environment of LSMMG, the RWV can also be used to grow pI'OdllCthIl by E. 6'0th WEIS fOllIld t0 b6 dramatically inhibited III 9
cells under normal gravity by simply Changing the position of the RWV (27)- These ﬁndings suggest that carbon source re- 5
the bioreactor. Figure 1A shows how the RWV bioreactors are pression Of these processes in 13- brevis and E- C05 are inﬂu- %
oriented to grow cells under conditions of LSMMG (Figure enced by growth in the RWV, although it is unclear how 93
1A, i) with the vessel perpendicular to the gravitational vector; LSMMG is related t0 this phenomenon since it was observed %
or normal gravity (i.e. 1 X g) (Fig. 1A, panel ii) with the vessel in both the LSMMG and 1 X 8 RWV orientations. ‘3;
parallel to the gravitational vector. Thus, the LSMMG and The site 0f microcin B17 and rapamycin accumulation was a
normal-gravity conditions in the RWV are identical except for found to be markedly different when the bacteria were cultured 3
the physical orientation Of the apparatus. in the RWV compared to when they were cultured in shaking 3
Although it is true that the RWV is used for Earth-based ﬂasks (28). In ﬂasks, accumulation of these peptide antibiotics '5
studies to learn how the environment of space will impact both W35 intracellular, whereas in the RWV, the majority 0f the E
eukaryotic and prokaryotic physiology, perhaps the most excit- product was found in the medium (i.e., extracellular). The 3
ing aspect of RWV culture techniques is that the low-shear authors noted that the shift in localization of microcin from 2-
growth environment allows these cells to assume medically and intracellular to extracellular twas prebably due to the rnuch h)
biologically important phenotypes that cannot be observed us- lower .degree of shear stress 1n the b10react0rs, s1nce add1t10n g
ing conventional culture methods. Although designed with of a s1ngle glass beaci t0 thetRWVtmedlum created enough b
spaceﬂight implications in mind, it is becoming increasingly shear to Change the s1te 0f mlerococm accumulatlon frorn the a
evident that the RWV may ﬁnd its greatest utility in ground- medlum t0 the cells <28) Th1s type of phenotype ass001ated 3
based applications such as (i) the formation and engineering of Wlth gteWth tn the RWV could be etxp101ted t0 1ncrease the 3
3-D tissue aggregates that structurally and functionally resem- secretlon and extracellular accumulatlon. of a cellular produet 9L)
ble in Vivo tissues (80, 82a, 101); (ii) understanding of the Of interest for use 1n b10process1ng and b10techn010glcal appll- 3:5
molecular mechanisms used by cells to sense and respond to cat10ns. . . . . g
LSMMG and the identities of the genes involved in response Enhanced Salmonella enterlca serovar Typhimurium V""“' N
to this signaling pathway (43’ 48, 52’ 107); (iii) understanding lence. As mentloned above, spaceﬂlght has the capa01ty to alter 9°
of how microbial pathogens modulate their Virulence both on 1mmune SYStem functlon 1n a Inanner Whleh suggests a tie- N
Earth and in space, which could provide clues to the function- creased ab111tyten10unta robust 1mmune teshonse t0 1nfect10n 3
ing of known Virulence systems or to the identiﬁcation of novel, (65’ 94)‘ In adeltlotl’ 1nherent 1n the. hab1tati0n Of spacecraft N
uncharacterized bacterial Virulence strategies (81, 106, 107); and SPaCe stat10ns IS exposure to mlcrobes 1n a closed,.self- *2-
and (iV) studies to further understand microbial metabolism cohtalned environmentw1th httle to no ab111ty t0 quarantlne a (2
and physi 01 0 gy (21’ 82). This s e cti on Of the r eVi ew focuses on ser10us 1nfect10us-d1seasetoutbreak, should one oecur. L1ke- 8
the growing body of information regarding the responses of w1se, the use Of regeneratlve llfe support systerns w111 serve to ,_..
microbes t0 the LSMMG growth environment of the RWV. 1ncrease exposure to pathegens and petentlal pathogens.
Therefore, the response of mlcrobes, espe01ally pathogens, to a
low-shear microgravity environment is of prime interest. Re-
Responses of Ba ct eri a t 0 LSMMG cent studies have demonstrated that the LSMMG growth en-
vironment 0f the RWV can enhance the virulence of a gram-
Altered secondary-metabolite production. Studies by De- negative bacterial pathogen, S. enterica serovar Typhimurium
main, Fang, and colleagues have examined the eﬂects Of (81). In the murine model of infection, the oral lethal dose of
growth in the RWV 0n the production of secondary metabo- S. enterica serovar Typhimurium grown under LSMMG for
lites by a variety of bacteria (21). These studies have provided killing 50% 0f the infected animal subjects (LDSO) was 5.2
substantial evidence that bacteria alter their metabolic prop- times lower the LD50 0f the same strain grown under normal
erties during LSMMG cultivation in the RWV apparatus. They gravity. Mice infected with 106 CFU of LSMMG-grown S.
also provide a ﬁrst step in examining the use Of RWV tech- enterica serovar Typhimurium displayed a decreased average
nology as a way to Optimize the production of microbial me- time to death compared to mice given the same dosage of cells
tabolites for biotechnological purposes. These metabolites in- grown under normal gravity (Fig. 2A). In addition, LSMMG-
Clude many important Chemicals and compounds that have grown S. enterica serovar Typhimurium showed increased col-

"
"8","352 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
A_ Salmonella Virulence mechanisms in a new way. The results
100 . . . . . . indicate that LSMMG can be added to the list of environmen-
_ tal signals already known to regulate the expression of Viru-
}: ' ‘ lence determinants in Salmonella, including osmolarity, pH,
2 oxidative stress, starvation, and growth phase (32, 69). The
E 50 i l . elucidation of the molecular mechanisms responsible for en-
5 . . . hanced Salmonella Virulence by LSMMG could lead to the
3,"": discovery of previously unknown Virulence mechanisms or sig-
n. - naling pathways. It will also be of interest to see how LSMMG
modulates the Virulence of other microbial pathogens.
0 _ ' ' ' Altered stress resistance and examination of LSMMG re-
0 5 10 15 20 sponses in an S. enterica serovar Typhimurium rpoS mstant. In
general, the ability of a pathogen to resist environmental
Time Of Death (DayS) stresses such as extreme ﬂuctuations in pH, osmolarity, and
temperature correlates with its Virulence potential (32, 69). U
Recent studies have shown that when cultured in the LSMMG g
B- environment of the RWV, S. enterica serovar Typhimurium 2
m 100000 demonstrated increased resistance to acid, osmotic and ther- 8
IE mal stresses, and ability to survive within macrophages than did %
‘6' normal-gravity-grown cells (81, 106, 107). This may help to Q-
3 1 0 0 0 0 eXplain the increased Virulence of S. enterica serovar Typhi- g
E I .1xg murium induced by LSMMG. However, the results also 3
8 serovar Typhlmurlum t0 OXIdaUVC stress (106>- T111818 an m- 1.3.
‘E I teresting ﬁnding it indicates that LSMMG does not in— g
a 10 o duce a general resistance to all environmental sressest and 3
'2 affects resistance differentially. LSMMG has also been ob- c-
2:, I served to alter the stress resistance of E. coli. LSMMG-grown a
1 0 _ ' E. coli cells are more resistant to the growth-inhibitory effects C”
Spleen leer of ethanol than are cells grown in shaking ﬂasks and are more a
FIG. 2. LSMMG-enhanced virulence of S. enterica serovar Typhi- resistant to osmotic and thermal shock than are cells grown at a
muriumin the murine model of infection. (A).Shortened timeto death 1 X g (37; S. V. Lynch and A. Matin, Abstr. 103m Gen. Meet. \
of m1ce 1nfected w1th LSMMG-grown S. enterzca serovar Typh1mur1nm Am. Soc. Microbiol. 2003’ abstr. I-038, 2003). 3
cells compared to m1ce 1nfected w1th 1 X g-grown cells. BALB/c m1ce , , , ,
(8 weeks old) were inoculated perorally with 2 X 106 CFU of LSMMG- RPOS 15 the prlmary s1gma factor respons1ble for the eXpres- 9%
or 1 X g-grown S. enterica serovar Typhimurium, and the survival of sion of genes that are required for resistance to environmental 2:5
the ?nimals W21? monitored for 20 (1213’? POStinfeﬁiOH- The 1961106“t stresses and has accordingly been described as the master reg- 93
$1er lval Of the mfecmd an1mals.over thls PenOd 1.8 piOtted’ and the ulator of the general stress response in E. coli and Salmonella ‘2
curves for LSMMG- and 1 X g-1nfected m1ce are 1nd1cated. (B) En- . . . [\D
hanced ability of LSMMG-grown S. amend, serovar Typhimurium (45, 67). Th1s assertlon 1s clearly demonstrated by the fact that 9,
cells to colonize the murine spleen and liver compared to that of 1 X RpoS-deﬁcient strains are highly sensitive to a wide range of N
g-grown cells. LSMMG- and 1 X g-grown S. enterica serovar Typhimu- environmental stresses and cannot induce the stress resistance 0
rium cells (2 X 106) were administered perorally as individual infec— that is observed under certain culture conditions such as acid S
tions to 8—week-old BALB/C mice. The spleen and liver were excised 6 . . . 0'
days after infection, and the recovered bacteria were quantitated. The ShOCk’ 081110th ,ShOCk’ statlonary phase, and carbon starvatlon ‘<
standard deviation represents the statistical difference between ﬁve (63, 73)- In addltlon, Salmonella ’""POS mutants are aV1rulent 1n (Q
mice for each infection group. (Reprinted from reference 81.) the murine model of infection, most probably because of de- g
ﬁcient expression of several genes required for full pathoge- $9..
nicity (18, 19, 31, 79). Because of the central role of RpoS in
onization of the murine liver and spleen following oral infec- Salmonella stress resistance and Virulence, the eﬁects of
tion compared to the normal gravity-grown strain (Fig. 2B). LSMMG were recently examined in an S. enterica serovar
This study was the ﬁrst direct evidence that LSMMG could Typhimurium rpoS mutant (106). The authors reasoned that if
alter microbial Virulence; it further demonstrates the global RpoS plays a role in the transmission of the LSMMG signal,
impact of LSMMG on microbial physiology. The molecular altered responses to LSMMG would be observed in the 17905
mechanisms responsible for the LSMMG-induced increase in mutant compared to the wild-type parent strain. The study
Salmonella Virulence are not yet known, and microarray anal- showed that RpoS is not required for the LSMMG response to
ysis (see below) did not reveal any of the known Salmonella occur in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium, since the same phys-
Virulence factors to be induced during growth under LSMMG iological responses to acid, osmotic, thermal, and oxidative
(107). Surprisingly, the expression of several genes in two ma- stresses were observed using wild-type and isogenic rpoS mu-
jor Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPI-1 and SPI-2) was tant Salmonella strains (106). In addition, the study used mi-
decreased under LSMMG (107). An exciting possibility is that croarray analysis to show that 25 genes belonging to the RpoS
LSMMG is inducing novel Salmonella Virulence mechanisms regulon (i.e., genes regulated by RpoS) did not undergo any
or is “ﬁne-tuning” the expression and/or function of known Change in expression under LSMMG but that a separate set of

"
"9","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 353

genes (i.e., genes not regulated by RpoS) displayed LSMMG may be experienced under LSMMG is a difference in the
responsiveness in both the wild-type and 17905 mutant strains accumulation of nutrients and cellular by-products in the local

(106). This indicates that transmission of the LSMMG signal enVironment around the cell (58, 59). It is interesting that the

does indeed occur in the 17905 mutant strain as it does in the altered growth kinetics observed in Salmonella and E. (3011' are
wild-type strain and that the altered stress resistance pheno- consistent with experiments performed on various space mis-

types associated with LSMMG in S. enterica serovar Typhimu— sions that found that bacteria grew to higher densities in liquid

rium are occurring Via an RpoS—independent pathway(s). It is culture during space ﬂight than the densities achieved by

also worth noting that this study also demonstrated that equivalent ground-based controls (16, 57, 103). The altered
LSMMG represents a novel environmental culture condition microbial growth kinetics observed during spaceﬂight has been

that can serve to preadapt a Salmonella rpoS mutant for resis- hypothesized to arise as a result of Changes in extracellular

tance to multiple environmental stresses. Interestingly, recent mass transport of nutrients and by-products (57). Diﬁerences
evidence indicates that in E. 6011', the RpoS protein level is in mass diﬁusion and other chemical alterations of the cellular
increased during culture at LSMMG as compared to 1 X g microenVironment could play a signiﬁcant role in altering mi-

(Lynch and Matin, Abstr. 103rd Gen. Meet. Am. Soc. Micro- crobial metabolic responses in microgravity and LSMMG.

biol 2003). This indicates that RpoS may be a part of the LSMMG regulon and evidence for Fur as a potential regu- U
LSMMG regulon in E. 6011', but it is not known how that lator 0f the S. enterica serovar Typhimurium LSMMG re- g
observation relates to LSMMG-induced stress responses. spouse. The LSMMG-induced phenotypic Changes observed 2

Altered growth kinetics. Monitoring the growth kinetics of with numerous bacterial species suggest that LSMMG repre- 8
bacteria under different conditions can reveal differences in the sents a global environmental regulatory signal in prokaryotes %
way in which the cells respond to the growth signals present in that serves to reprogram gene expression (21, 82). Elucidation 0-
each enVironment. When the effect of LSMMG on the growth of the mechanisms involved in transmitting this signal and 3h
kinetics of Salmonella in broth culture was recently examined, identiﬁcation of the genes that are altered in expression in 3
the results showed that LSMMG shortened the generation response to LSMMG would signiﬁcantly aid our understanding 3
time of S. enterica serovar Typhimurium in minimal medium by of the LSMMG culture responses and possibly lead to ways of '5
25 to 30 min compared to the time measured under 1 X g manipulating this signal for beneﬁcial engineering of microbes. Q
conditions (106). This result further Characterized LSMMG as Two-dimensional (2-D) gel analysis has shown that the eXpres- g
a signal that has direct eﬁects on S. enterica serovar Typhi- sion of numerous S. enterica serovar Typhimurium proteins is 0'
murium metabolism and that acts to reprogram the physiolog- altered when the cells are grown under LSMMG (81). A recent 5
ical state of the bacteria. This phenotype was observed in both study also used 2-D gel analysis to show that several E. (3011' g
wild-type S. enterica serovar Typhimurium and an isogenic proteins are LSMMG regulated (Lynch and Matin, Abstr. b
rpoS mutant, providing further evidence that RpoS is not re- 103rd Gen. Meet. Am. Soc. Microbiol. 2003). However, these a
quired for LSMMG signals to be transmitted by the cell. In- analyses did not allow identiﬁcation of the LSMMG-regulated 3
terestingly, the growth kinetics of LSMMG-grown and 1 X proteins. Subsequently, DNA microarrays were used to eluci- :5
g-grown Salmonella appear identical over the same time course date the global transcriptional response of S. enterica sero- 9%
for cultures in Luria-Bertani broth, a rich medium that con- var Typhimurium to LSMMG (107). Compared to identical 3:5
tains many energy-providing factors compared to minimal me- growth conditions under normal gravity (1 X g), LSMMG m
dium. The combination of minimal medium and LSMMG differentially regulated the expression of 163 genes distributed ‘2
seems to induce increased Salmonella metabolic activity that throughout the Salmonella Chromosome, representing func- 8
drives growth, although the speciﬁc pathways and genes in- tionally diverse groups encoding transcriptionalregulators,Vir- “N
volved are not yet known. However, microarray analysis did ulence factors, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthetic enzymes, 3
reveal many genes that could be involved in altering the ribosomal proteins, iron utilization enzymes, and proteins of N
growth-related metabolism to be induced in Salmonella at unknown function (Fig. 3) (107). Several of the identiﬁed 2-
LSMMG, but their role in this phenotype has not been deter- genes are located in the same transcriptional operon or in (Q
mined (107). A similar growth-related phenotype has also been physically linked clusters, indicating that certain genetic loci g
observed with E. coli grown at LSMMG. A study by Fang et al. may be targeted by the LSMMG response. It may be important $9..
demonstrated an increase in the dry-cell weight of E. coli to delineate these physically linked Clusters since these genes
during culture at LSMMG compared to culture at 1 X g (28). may be part of a large “island” that may contain operons that
It is interesting that, similar to the S. enterica serovar Typhi- are coregulated by a single common regulator protein. Two
murium growth experiments, the E. (3011' growth experiments such S. enterica serovar Typhimurium islands, SPI-1 and SPI-2,
were performed with cells in minimal media. Together, these contain several LSMMG-regulated genes (see Table 3). A rep-
ﬁndings indicate that bacteria can more readily proliferate in resentative list of the 163 identiﬁed genes is presented in Table
an environment of LSMMG (similar to space or certain in Vivo 3. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis was used to verify the
niches) and suggest that bacteria in this environment are more results obtained from the microarray analysis. The study indi-
readily able to initiate growth that could lead to contamination, cated that the expression of a large operon containing the 17%
colonization, and infection. LPS biosynthetic genes was decreased in response to LSMMG,

A possible interpretation of this result is that there are and, strikingly, Salmonella LPS levels Changed accordingly, as
differences in mass diffusion between the LSMMG and 1 X g predicted by this microarray result. This ﬁnding takes on ad-
environments that may affect nutrient uptake and metabolism ditional signiﬁcance since it has been hypothesized that cells
independently of any Salmonella or E. coli LSMMG responses. sense Changes in mechanical forces, including shear and grav-

For example, a possible result of lowered mass diffusion that ity, at their cell surface (7,48, 97).

"
"10","354 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
1 most exciting aspects of future LSMMG studies Will be to
10 identify additional regulators of this signaling process. The
4500000?“ microarray study indicates that LSMMG is a major global reg-
."" mu 2 ulatory signal in Salmonella and provides an important step
“7/ toward understanding the response of bacteria to LSMMG
' growth signals by forming a potential “roadmap” for future
4000000 3/ 3 studies involving the molecular response to LSMMG.
Microarray analysis is also currently being used to identify
9‘1. Salmonella enterica 1°°°°°° E. coli genes that are regulated in response to LSMMG (D.
serovar Typhimurium Tucker, C. M. Ott, D. L. Pierson, and G. E. Fox, Abstr. 103rd
8\[ ”I genome Gen. Meet. Am. Soc Mlcroblol. 2003, abstr. I-043, 2003) Thus
far, the study has revealed a number of genes from dlfferent
asooooo 4,857 Kb 4 functional groups to be regulated by LSMMG including genes
3/ involved in acid tolerance, chaperone function, and cell motil-
15°°°°° ity. It Will be very interesting to see how the full body of these U
. ""K results, as well as the results of similar analyses done With other g
7 \ 5 bacterial species, compare to those obtained With S. enterica 2
3000000 serovar Typhimurium. Comparison of results from such anal- 8
"" 2°°°°°° yses With those for other bacterial species Will provide knowl- %
2500000 V: edge about Whether the known effects of LSMMG are a gen- 93-“
eral phenomenon or species speciﬁc. 8
FIG. 3. Chromosomal organization of the S. enterica serovar Typhi- 3
murium LSMMG regulon. The circular Chromosome is schematically 3.
depicted, With kilobase coordinates noted and labeled. LSMMG-reg- Responses of Yeast t0 LSMMG g
ulated genes as identiﬁed by microarray analysis are noted as unla- T3.
beled lines extending from the chromosome. The genes belong to Recently, microarray analysis was used to examine the ki- Q
diverse functional groups including transcriptional regulators, Viru- netiC Changes in gene expression in the yeast S, cerevisiae dur- 3
lence factors,.LPS biosynthetic enzymes, ribosomal proteins, iron uti- ing culture in the RWV for diﬁerent periods (52). The 5. (37
hzatlon functlons, and protelns of unknown functlon. The numbered . . . ‘1
brackets indicate clusters of LSMMG—regulated genes that are physi- cereVlSlae RWV cultures Incubated at LSMMG were compared :11)
cally linked (Within 50 kb) or part of the same operon. Identiﬁcation of to cultures grown in identical RWV bioreactors in the 1 X 8 3
such physically linked gene clusters is important beeause they may orientation on a gyrorotatory shaker. The study identiﬁed b
represent genes that are part of the same “1sland,” which may contaln LSMMG-responsive genes at diﬁerent time points and used 6
0W0“ that. are coregulateq by .the same transcriptional regulator. cluster analysis to group genes that displayed the same pattern \
Th1s could glve Clues to the 1dent1ty of potentlal LSMMG regulators. , , O
In fact, clusters 7 and 4 contain several LSMMG—responsive genes that Of eXpress10n Changes over the tlme course. The DNA se- 3
belong to the Salmonella pathogenicity islands SPI-1 and SPI-2, re- quences of the identiﬁed genes were scanned for a variety of 9%
SPeCtiVeIY- (Reprinted from reference 107 With PermiSSiOH-) promoter elements to deﬁne the possible mechanisms mediat- 3:5
ing these genetic Changes. This analysis revealed candidate 9:
regulatory binding motifs similar to the Raplp transcription ‘2
On DNA sequence analysis of the LSMMG regulon genes, it factor binding site and the stress-responsive element (52). B
was observed that ferric uptake regulator (Fur) binding sites Raplp is a transcriptional regulator of many genes including “N
were associated With several of these genes. In addition, several those Whose expression is altered in response to Changes in 3
genes that are involved in iron metabolism or that could po- growth rate, including ribosomal proteins (84). Several of N
tentially use iron for normal function were identiﬁed as the S. cerevisiae LSMMG-responsive genes Which contained 2-
LSMMG regulated. The authors investigated the LSMMG re- Raplp binding sites are involved in glycolysis and were indi- (Q
sponse in an S. enterica serovar Typhimurium fur mutant strain cated to be upregulated in response to LSMMG by comparison g
compared to that in an isogenic Wild-type control. The Wild- With the control culture. In agreement With the microarray $9..
type strain displayed LSMMG-induced acid resistance as eX- data, increased glucose utilization and increased expression of
pected, but the fur mutant did not show any detectable acid ribosomal-protein genes were also observed in yeast cultured
resistance induced by LSMMG (107). This indicates that Fur is in the RWV compared to the control culture. Although a
required for LSMMG-induced acid resistance in S. enterica Change in Raplp expression was not observed, the authors
serovar Typhimurium and suggests that Fur is involved in the suggested that the increased glucose utilization in the RWV
transmission of the LSMMG signal. The role of Fur as a global might provide a model for increased Raplp-mediated tran-
regulator of a variety of cellular functions in response to an scription since there is evidence that activation of Raplp sites
environmental signal (in addition to iron concentration) has could be associated With this phenomenon (52). Interestingly,
been previously suggested (25). However, it is expected that it has been proposed by Li et al. that plasma membrane
other regulators in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium are in- stretching in S. cerevisiae is important in mediating the coor-
Volved in addition to Fur for LSMMG signal transmission, dination of ribosome and tRNA synthesis With cell growth (66).
given the large number of functional gene groups that are In this regard, it is relevant to reiterate that S. enterica serovar
affected by LSMMG. Based on studies With S. enterica serovar Typhimurium eXhibited altered production of genes encoding
Typhimurium to date, Fig. 4 illustrates the current knowledge ribosomal components and tRNA synthetases in response to
of LSMMG signal transmission in the bacterial cell. One of the LSMMG culture in the RWV (107). Taken together, the re-

"
"11","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 355
TABLE 3. S. enterica serovar Typhimurium genes belonging to the LSMMG regulon“
o o b
STM gene ID no. Gene name Efﬁgy; £2330 Gene functi0n(s)
Up-regulated genes
STM0459 ybaO 6.50 i 3.04 Putative transcriptional regulator, Aan family
STM1625 ych 5.00 i 0 Putative transcriptional regulator, LysR family
STM3014 lysR 5.00 i 4.36 Positive transcriptional regulator, LysR family
STM4322 yij 8.33 i 2.89 Putative bacterial regulatory protein, merR family
STM0592 fepD 3.17 i 1.61 ABC superfamily, ferric enterobactin transporter
STM1471 rstB 10.00 i 0 Sensory histidine kinase, tWO-component With RstA
STM3630 dppA 8.33 i 2.89 ABC superfamily, dipeptide transport protein
STM1327 ydiY 10.00 i 0 Putative salt-induced outer membrane protein
STM1517 ydeD 7.33 i 4.62 Putative permease, integral membrane protein
STM4591 sthE 6.67 i 2.89 Putative major ﬁmbrial subunit
STM3069 pgk 10.00 i 0 Phosphoglycerate kinase
STM3939 cyaA 5.73 i 3.96 Adenylate cyclase U
Down-regulated genes g
STM2869 orgA 0.26 i 0.04 SPI-1 type III secretory protein a
STM2874 prgH 0.35 i 0.11 SPI-1 type III secretion machinery O
STM2883 sipD 0.37 i 0.07 SPI-1 type III secreted protein, regulator of secretion 8
STM2893 invI 0.33 i 0.18 SPI-1 type III secretory protein (D
STM2896 invA 0.35 i 0.11 SPI-1 type III secretion machinery 0-
STM2902 pigB 0.41 i 0.07 SPI-1 pathogenicity island-associated protein 3""
STM1398 5563 0.42 i 0.11 SPI-2 type III secretion system effector 3
STM1412 ssaL 0.28 i 0.11 SPI-2 type III secretion system apparatus :-
STM1414 ssaV 0.35 i 0.03 SPI-2 type III secretion system apparatus :
STM1631 556] 0.37 i 0.03 SPI-2 type III secretion system effector '_C_
STM0543 ﬁmA 0.41 i 0.1 Major type I ﬁmbrial subunit Q
STM2082 rbe 0.41 : 0.08 LPS side chain synthesis 3
STM2084 rfbM 0.42 : 0.05 LPS side chain synthesis 3
STM2093 rbe 0.32 : 0.01 LPS side chain synthesis 2'
STM1371 .9qu 0.46 i 0.06 Putative ABC superfamily transport protein 9)
STM1373 sufS 0.34 i 0.06 Selenocysteine lyase g
a This list is not comprehensive but is representative of the 163 LSMMG regulon genes identiﬁed by microarray analysis. 0
b Expression ratio is the value for the LSMMG ﬂuorescent channel divided by the value for the 1 X g channel as described in reference 107. a
\
O
:5
sults from both S. cerevisiae and S. enterica serovar Typhi- However, insight gained from the response of microbes to E,
murium culture in the RWV suggest that Changes in genotype Changes in other mechanical and physical forces may provide 3:5
and phenotype by these two model microbes in response to insight into the mechanistic eﬂects 0f microgravity at the cel- 93
LSMMG may be initially sensed as mechanical deformation 0r lular level. To better understand how microbial cells transduce ‘2
perturbation of the cell surface and subsequently transmitted mechanical force into biological responses, it is relevant to B
into a molecular response. revisit What is currently known about how microbes respond to N
Collectively, the results from microarray analyses using Changes in the mechanicalforces 0f osmotic pressure gradients 3
model prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms have begun to and ﬂuid shear. This is because numerous reports suggest that N
deﬁne the molecular mechanisms of the microbial response to the cell perceives Changes in gravity, as well as Changes in g
the LSMMG culture environment of the RWV. The results osmotic gradients and ﬂuid shear, at the cell surface and trans- (Q
from the various studies of microbial responses to LSMMG are duces the resulting signals to the inside of the cell (6, 48, 49, g
summarized in Table 4. Future studies hold exciting promise to 97). Indeed, microgravity and microgravity analogues, osmotic (.9.-
provide insight into the speciﬁc microbial signaling pathways gradients, and ﬂuid shear all cause Changes in the cell surface
involved in sensing and responding to Changes in the mechan- of microbial cells (6, 22, 86, 96, 97, 107). Thus, local distortion
ical and physical forces of ﬂuid shear stress and gravitational in the cell surface appears to be common to mechanisms of
force, respectively. cellular mechanotransduction. Moreover, mechanical restruc-
turing 0r deformation of the cell surface results in Changes in
HOW DO CELLS RESPOND TO MICROGRAVITY, cell-signaling pathways (48). While there is no evidence that
MICROGRAVITY ANALOGUES, AND OTHER there 1s a shared mechanlsm used by cells to sense Changes 1n
LOW-SHEAR ENVIRONMENTS? osmotlc gradlents, ﬂu1d shear levels, and graV1ty, 1t 1s not un-
common for microbes to exhibit cross talk in response to dif-
It is Clear that both prokaryotic and eukaryotic microbes ferent environmental stimuli (87, 88).
demonstrate profound Changes in response to microgravity and
mlcrograV1ty-analogue env1r0nments; however, the spe01ﬁc Inﬂuence of Fluid Shear Force on Cellular Physiology
mechan1sm(s) of responses due to graV1ty reductlon and the
resulting 10W-ﬂuid shear is not well deﬁned. Studies in numer- The study Of phenotypic alterations in microbes as a result of
ous laboratories are under way to address this important issue. the mechanical force of ﬂOW-induced shear is a growing and

"
"12","356 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
Component
of LSMMG
mechanism
3% \.
\ / / AE—y Fur-
LSMMG -> amaze _> I I regulated
signal I \ LSMMG
I . genes
\ / 4|:_y Other U
_* l: LSMMG g
“’ genes 2
\i—r 8
‘ C.
(D
Q.
:h
FIG. 4. Diagram summarizing how the LSMMG signal could be transmitted in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. Based on current data, this g
diagram depicts a potential picture of LSMMG signal transmission in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. The mechanical, physical, and/or chemical
Changes associated with LSMMG culture in the RWV are sensed by the bacterial cell using a hypothetical sensor mechanism. The sensor a
component of this mechanism (depicted as a rectangle) is probably located at the cell envelope (similar to common prokaryotic response regulator '9
systems), but an intracellular location is possible. Suggested candidates and mechanistic models for this sensor are discussed in the text. This signal Q
is probably transduced to intracellular regulators that regulate the expression of LSMMG—responsive genes. The potential regulators (depicted as 3
cylinders) of the LSMMG response are labeled. Based on experimental data, it appears that the RpoS sigma factor, a logical candidate regulator, 3
is not required for the LSMMG response in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium. Data obtained from microarray-related experiments suggest that the 9;
Fur transcriptional regulator is involved in S. enterica serovar Typhimurium LSMMG signal transmission. Given the large number of functional 9)
groups of genes regulated by LSMMG, it is likely that other regulators, indicated by the question mark, are also involved. In addition, there may 3
be overlap in the regulation of Fur-regulated LSMMG genes and other such genes controlled by the unknown regulator(s). This potential cross .
talk is indicated by a double-headed arrow. 2
“E
O
:5
exciting ﬁeld of research. This is because the level of shear FimH subunits into the body of the pilus appendage). Con- 9%
force experienced by microbes has important and far-reaching necting the two domains is a ﬂexible linker that is maintained 3:5
implications, since (i) Changes in ﬂuid shear profoundly affect in a compact state (due to hydrogen bonding) under conditions 93
microbial responses (10, 82, 97) and (ii) the level of shear force of lowered shear. In this conformation, the lectin domain binds ‘2
experienced by microorganisms is expected to vary greatly dur- mannose loosely. When shear is increased, the hydrogen 8
ing the natural course of their life cycles (this is especially true bond(s) is broken, the linker region extends, and the resulting “N
for pathogens). Conventional cultivation of pathogens has uti- conformational Change decreases the off—rate of FimH binding C3
lized either static or vigorously shaken cultures, neither of to mannose. Binding of FimH to mannose is predicted to be M
which may be accurate representations of what occurs during optimized under these conditions. Then when shear decreases, ~2-
pathogen interactions with hosts. In 1983, Brooks and Trust the FimH off—rate increases and dissociation from mannose (Q
demonstrated that Changes in ﬂuid shear force have a pro- occurs. This has been described as a “catCh-bond” model and g
found effect on bacterial adhesion (11). This study was the ﬁrst can explain how FimH modulates its binding affinity to man- 9..
to demonstrate that enhanced shear force increased the bind- nose in response to Changes in shear force.
ing of bacteria to red blood cells, although a mechanism was The functional signiﬁcance of shear-enhanced adhesion has
not identiﬁed. Recently, an elegant study by Thomas et al. important implications for essentially any microbe, since mi-
provided mechanistic evidence as to how bacterial adhesion is croorganisms encounter a wide variety of dynamic shear forces
affected by Changes in ﬂuid shear stress (97). This study used throughout their life cycles and must be able to respond ap-
red blood cell agglutination assays in combination with ﬂow propriately. This is especially true for pathogens, which often
Chamber experiments to compare the ability of several struc- initiate infection by colonizing host tissues Via ﬁmbrial adhe-
tural variants of E. coli FimH adhesin to bind to red blood cells sions and are subjected to both continuous and intermittent
under a variety of ﬂuid shear conditions. The authors showed shear forces in Vivo during the natural course of infection (11).
that adhesion was enhanced by increased shear force, thus
demonstrating direcbmechanosensing Of ﬂuid shear by the Mechanisms T0 Sense Deformation of the Cell Membrane
FlmH adhes1n. In the1r molecular model of FimH response to
ﬂuid shear, the authors describe FimH as a two-domain pro- Fluctuation of external osmolarity is a common mechanical
tein consisting of a lectin domain (which binds host cell surface force Change to which microbial cells must adapt throughout
mannose residues) and a pilin domain (which incorporates their life cycles. The response of a microbial cell to Changes in

"
"13","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 357
TABLE 4. Summary of LSMMG-induced eﬂects 0n microbial physiology
Physiological effect induced by LSMMG Bacterial species Reference(s)
Altered production of secondary metabolites
Production inhibited
Cephalosporin Streptomyces clavuligems 29
Microcin B 17 Escherichia coli 28
Rapamycin Streptomyces hygroscopicus 26
Glycerol or glucose repression inhibited in RWV
(not speciﬁc to LSMMG)
Gramicidin S (glycerol) Bacillus brevis 30
Microcin B17 (glucose) Escherichia coli 27
Increased extracellular accumulation
Microcin B17 Escherichia coli 28
Rapamycin Streptomyces hygroscopicus 26
Increased Virulence in murine model of infection Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 81
(decreased LDSO, shortened host time to death, g
increased liver and spleen colonization) g
:5
Altered stress resistance 6
Increased ethanol stress resistance Escherichia coli 37 8
Increased acid, osmotic, and thermal stress resistance Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 81, 106 CD
Decreased oxidative stress (H202) resistance Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 106 E;
_,
Increased survival Within J 774 macrophages Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 81, 106 g
Decreased generation time in M9 minimal medium Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 106 g
Global alteration of gene expression (LSMMG regulon) Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 107 Q
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 52 g
F3
8
extracellular solute concentration, both a decrease (hypoos- release of Ca2+ from the yeast vacuole into the cytoplasm. It is g
motic stress) and an increase (hyperosmotic stress), is essential interesting that Y VClp is a member of the transient receptor a
for cellular metabolism and survival. Microbes sense Changes potential family Channels (Trp), several of Which have been 3
in osmotic pressure gradients directly through tension in their associated With mechanosensation in animals, including detec- :5
cell membrane (6, 7, 86). For example, in response to sudden tion of touch, hearing, balance, Vibration, limb location, and 9%
osmolarity decreases, bacteria use mechanosensitive mem- osmotic pressure (24). In addition, it has been recently pro- 3:5
brane mechanisms to help maintain osmotic balance and pre- posed that yeast maintain balances in their protein-synthesiz- m
vent cell lysis (6). These membrane mechanisms are mechan- ing machinery, i.e., tRNA and rRNA levels, by sensing changes ‘2
ically gated protein Channels that prevent cell lysis by sensing in membrane stretching induced by turgor (66). The ability to B
membrane deformation induced by turgor and allowing the coordinate protein synthesis With Changes in membrane defor- “N
release of hydrostatic pressure buildup (6, 40). Since their mation due to turgor pressure may help to achieve metabolic 3
initial discovery in E. (3011', the existence of mechanically gated economy. It may also serve to promote survival under adverse N
Channels has been documented in both gram-positive and conditions by preventing protein synthesis When cells are un- 2-
other gram-negative bacteria (4, 5, 8, 9, 71, 92, 109, 110). There able to eXpand their plasma membranes. Thus far, the unifying (Q
are tWO major families of mechanosensitive Channels in bacte- theme of mechanosensitive ion-gated Channels is that they are E
ria Which regulate cellular turgor by sensing and responding to membrane-bound protein complexes that Open and close in $9..
perturbations in the lipid bilayer 0f the cell membrane caused response to mechanical Changes involving membrane deforma-
by osmotic swelling: the 1arge-conductance Channel (MscL) ti0n. Further analysis Of mechanically gated protein Channels
and the small-conductance Channel (MscS) (7, 9, 40, 85). Both in both bacteria and yeast Will provide fundamental insight into
MscL and MscS form gated protein Channels Which directly the similarities and differences among the force-transducing
detect stretch forces transmitted from the lipid bilayer induced mechanisms used by different types of cells. The mechanisms
during osmotic downshift (i.e., stretCh-sensitive ion channels) of hOW cells respond to Changes in mechanical forces such as
(7, 8, 40, 85). The Open conformation of these Channels,WhiCh ﬂuid shear and membrane stretching are very likely to be
is induced by tension in the lipid bilayer, serves as a safety valve relevant in forming an overall picture of hOW cells respond to
for the release of mechanosensitive ions and the integrity of microgravity and the associated IOW-shear ﬂuid mechanics.
the cell structure (6, 7, 40, 85). Recently, the yeast vacuolar
Channel protein Y VClp yvas. demonstrated to be a mechano- Molecular Model for Microbial “Sensing” of
sens1t1ve 10n Channel Wthh 1s act1vated 1n respbnse t6 stretch Microgravity and LSMMG
forces on the vacuolar membrane durlng osmotlc upshlft (108).
The stretch force on the vacuolar membrane was shown to Since liquid environments in microgravity and during
induce the Open conformation of Y VClp With the concomitant LSMMG culture in the RWV are associated With lowered ﬂuid

"
"14","358 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
A. B.
| V——|
Increased
__Extracellular Shear force A
<— S
Decreased shear force
(microgravity or LSMMG) W Broken
Hydrogen
C9"" Hydrogen
membrane bond
\. >/ g
Higher shear LO‘YBI‘ silear :55
' 51 na S
Lower shear Signals g Higher shear 6
signals signals a
(D
Q.
a
_ 0
FIG. 5. Model for the way in which microbes may sense Changes in aqueous shear force and transmit this signal at the molecular level. Since 3
aqueous environments in microgravity and during LSMMG culture in the RWV are associated with lowered shear forces, this model may explain 3
how microbes “sense” these environments. The functioning of the sensor molecule in this model is based on the data for the shear-responsive 6""
E. coli FimH adhesin. A membrane-bound protein with two domains connected by a ﬂexible linker is depicted. The rectangular domain is Q
embedded in the membrane and can also serve to initiate signaling inside the cell in response to Changes in the linker domain conformation. The 3
triangular domain is extracellular and can initiate Changes in linker domain conformation in response to Changes in shear stress. (A), Lowered 3
shear. A hydrogen bond (or another type of noncovalent bond) is formed between a residue on the linker domain and a residue on the membrane 0'
domain (both depicted as Circles) and keeps the linker in a compact conformation. One hydrogen bond is depicted, but several such bonds could S
eXist, involving multiple residues. This compact linker domain conformation causes the membrane domain to respond by activating signaling m
pathways associated with lower shear and/or deactivating pathways associated with high shear responses. The result would be responses associated 3
with lower shear. (B) Increased shear. The increased shear force sensed by the extracellular domain weakens and breaks the hydrogen bond(s) 0
between the linker domain and the membrane domain. This causes the membrane domain to ﬁre signaling pathways associated with higher shear a
and decrease signals associated with lowered shear. The result would be responses associated with higher shear. In this model, the microbe would 3
not be responding to Changes in gravity force directly but to the lowered aqueous shear force that occurs when a microbe is suspended in an :5
aqueous environment at microgravity or LSMMG. L
g
c
Q)
shear forces, this may provide one explanation of how mi- the membrane domain to send responses inside the cell. These ‘2
crobes “sense” these environments. The results of the E. 6011' responses could result in (i) activation of signaling pathways 8
FimH study described above provide an excellent basis for such associated with lower shear stress, (ii) deactivation of signaling “N
a model (51, 97). In this model (Fig. 5), the functioning of a pathways associated with higher shear stress, or (iii) both of 3
sensor protein embedded in the prokaryotic cell membrane is these events. This would result in phenotypic responses asso- N
based on the data for the FimH adhesin. This sensor protein ciated with lower shear. Under conditions of increased shear 2-
would have two domains connected by a ﬂexible linker region. force, perturbation of the extracellular domain weakens and to
One domain is embedded in the membrane (the rectangle in breaks the hydrogen b0nd(s) between the linker domain and E
Fig. 5) and can serve to initiate signaling inside the cell in membrane domain. This conformational Change causes the $9..
response to changes in the linker domain conformation. This membrane domain to activate signaling pathways associated
domain would be analogous to the membrane-bound response with higher shear and/or deactivate signals associated with
protein in the well-Characterized two-component or response lowered shear. The result would be phenotypic responses as-
regulator model of prokaryotic signal transduction. The other sociated with higher shear. In such a model, the possible mech-
domain is extracellular (the triangle in Fig. 5) and can initiate anisms used by the membrane domain to transmit the signal
changes in linker domain conformation in response to Changes are numerous. The membrane domain could phosphorylate
in shear stress. Under conditions of lowered shear (such as regulator proteins that alter the transcription of targeted
those in a ﬂuid environment in microgravity or LSMMG), a genes, similar to the two-component model. Alternatively, the
hydrogen bond is formed between a residue on the linker membrane domain may interact with microbial cytoskeletal
domain and a residue on the membrane domain (both de- elements (see below) to initiate the mechanical Changes in cell
picted as Circles in Fig. 5) and keeps the linker in a compact structure or function that may be associated with microgravity
conformation. (N ote that this bond could also be another type or LSMMG. Several other possibilities for transmission of this
of noncovalent bond. One hydrogen bond is depicted here, but signal exist as well. However, the detailed example illustrated
several bonds could theoretically exist, involving multiple res- by the responsiveness of the FimH protein to shear stress
idues.) The compact conformation of the linker domain causes provides an excellent overall picture of a potential molecular

"
"15","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 359
mechanism for the way in which cells can cause the phenotypic subunits as described above (85). A member of the Trp (tran-
Changes associated with an altered mechanical force. sient receptor potential) family of mechanosensitive Channels
has recently been Cloned and isolated from yeast cells and
I s Th er e a D e di c at e d Gravitational S ens 01' shown to be a Ca2+ Channel that responds to mechanical sig-
Mechanism in Mi cr 0b e s? nals (108). Although the major mechanlcal signal for these
Channels 1s thought to 1nvolve Changes 1n osmotlc pressure and
In the above model, the microbe would not be responding to cell turgor, interactions that occur at the membrane surface
Changes in gravity force directly but would be responding to under normal gravity and/or higher-shear conditions may
the lowered ﬂuid shear force that occurs when a microbe is cause local changes in membrane ﬂuidity and deformation,
suspended in an aqueous enVironment at microgravity or either related or unrelated to osmotic pressure. Mechanosen-
LSMMG. This naturally leads to the question whether there is sitive channels such as those mentioned here could translate
a cellular sensor that microbes use to sense gravity directly. In changes in membrane deformation associated with micrograv-
other words, is there a bona ﬁde microbial gravitational sensor ity or LSMMG into cellular responses.
molecule(s)? Indeed, gravitational force is very weak com- However, with these potentialmechanisms, it is highlylikely
pared to the other fundamental physical forces of nature, and that gravity is being sensed not directly but indirectly by the 3
there is debate about whether cells are able to directly sense sensing of other changes associated with altered gravity. An 5
such a weak force (48, 60). However, there is ample evidence essential requirement for a possible microbial gravity-sensing 2
that both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells have molecular molecule or mechanism would be to respond directly to the 8
mechanisms t0 sense and respond t0 mechanical Changes and gravity force vector that is oriented toward the Earth’s surface. 8
StI‘CSSCS (6,48, 97). MOI‘COVCI‘, there is no question that both Thus, a major factor in such a mechanism would be one of E;
eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells respond and phenotypically orientation. In microgravity, the sensed orientation is altered a
change when cultured in microgravity and LSMMG enViron- because particles or objects can “ﬂoat” in a direction opposite 3
ments (21, 22, 82, 101). However, in relation to the Changes to that of the gravity vector. This would provide a key distinc- 3
observed during microgravity and LSMMG, are the 06118 IC- tion between the two environments of the Earth’s surface and '5
sponding t0 altered gravity (0f perception 0f altered gravity in of microgravity. Therefore, a key question is this: in all the E
LSMMG) 0t t0 other mechanical 0t chemical changes in the positions that microbes assume relative to the gravitational 3
local enVironment that ICSUIt from thC 8.11:6er gravity? III thC vector, is there an orientation sensor that always “knows” C-
tWO diﬂerent explanations, the cells are responding either di' where the true gravity vector is relative to the current position? a
rectly t0 altered gravity 0t indirectly t0 altered gravity by sehS' The discovery of such a molecular sensor would be truly as- 3
ing other changes that result from that environment. Of tounding, if one eXists at all. However, the alternative to a true b
course, both events COUId be happening at the same time. microbial gravitational sensor mechanism would be the com- 6
However, the question whether there is a dedicated gravita- bined action of other mechano- and Chemosensitive mecha- 3
tional sensor molecule is unanswered at present. nisms that respond to the Changes associated with alterations 3
1h microbes, there are certainly some possible molecular in gravity. At present, this View best ﬁts the available experi- 9%
candidates that may serve as sensors of the mechanical Changes mental information regarding cellular gravity sensing. 2:5
associated with microgravity. One such candidate is repre- m
sented by the microbial cytoskeletal proteins and their poly- ‘2
merized structures. Elegant work by Ingber and colleagues has CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 8
shown how mammalian cells probably use tensegrity-based “N
cytoskeletal architecture (triangular, geodesic shapes) to trans- Throughout their life cycles, microbes are exposed to an 3
late Changes in mechanical forces at the membrane to cor- array Of physical and mechanical forces ranging from those N
responding molecular responses inside the cell, including generated by hydrostatic pressure gradients and ﬂuid shear 2-
Changes in cell signaling (48, 49). A similar type of mechano- stress to the constant forces exerted on cells by gravity. Alter- (Q
sensing mechanism could be used in microbes as well. Actin ations in these forces result in dynamic modiﬁcations in the g
and tubulin homologues (Mbl/MreB and FtsZ, respectively) in function and phenotype of microbial cells. Recently, several (A
bacteria polymerize into cytoskeleton-like structures, and mu- important studies have demonstrated the remarkable and var-
tants of these proteins are defective in cell shape (38). The ied roles that mechanical forces play in microbial gene expres-
microtubule and actin-like elements of yeast are well Charac- sion, physiology, and pathogenesis. However, limited informa-
terized and function to establish cell shape and diVision site tion is available regarding how mechanical signals, such as
location. Although these elements in bacteria and yeast have pressure or mechanical force delivered to a cell, are translated
yet to be shown to form tensegrity structures (the Mbl/MreB to direct biological responses. It is probable that mechanical
and FtsZ proteins actually form spiral structures), they could and physical signals sensed by the microbe may be integrated
serve to translate mechanical and physical Changes into molec- with other environmental signals and transduced into a bio-
ular responses that alter cell-signaling pathways. Another Chemical response. Thus, studying the response of microbes to
set of possible molecular candidates for sensing mechanical Changes in mechanical and physical forces may provide insight
Changes due to microgravity are the mechanosensitive Chan- into a key mechanism to orchestrate and ﬁne-tune the cellu-
nels in bacteria and yeast (85). In bacteria, the members of the lar response to environmental stimuli. Moreover, the study of
MscL and MscS protein families are membrane-bound gating microbial mechanotransduction may identify common con-
Channels that sense Changes in membrane deformation and served mechanisms used by cells to perceive Changes in me-
respond by open or Closing a large pore formed by multimer Chanical and/or physical forces and has potential to provide

"
"16","360 NICKERSON ET AL. MICROBIOL. MOL. BIOL. REV.
valuable insight into understanding mechanosensing mecha— box: transcriptional metalloregulation by the Fur protein. J . Bacteriol. 181:
- - - - - - - 6223—6229.
nlsms m hlgher orgamsms, InCIU’dmg plants and ammals' 26. Fang, A., D. Pierson, S. Mishra, and A. Demain. 2000. Growth of Strepto-
myces hygroscopicus in rotating-wall bioreactor under simulated micrograv-
ity inhibits rapamycin production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 54:33—36.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 27. Fang, A., D. Pierson, S. Mishra, and A. Demain. 2000. Relief from glucose
We are grateful to Tim Hammond and Pat Allen for helpful discus- ihterference in microcin .B-17. biosynthesis by growth in a rotating-wall
sions. 28 gloreagtoi.) LIett. App; IKI/[lcrlebloh 311539—41. d A 1) 1997 Eff f
. . . ang, ., . ierson, . is ra, . oenig, an . emain. . ect 0
Work 1n the NICkerSOH laboratory was supported by grants NAGZ' simulated microgravity and shear stress on microcin B7 production by
1378, NAG9-1350, and NCC 2-1362 from the Natlonal Escherichia coli and on its excretion into the medium. Appl. Environ.
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and LEQSF-1999- Microbiol. 63:4090—4092.
02-RD-A-41 from the Louisiana Board Of Regents Support Foun- 29. Fang, A., D. Pierson, S. Mishra, D. Koenig, and A. Demain. 1997. Second-
dation. Work in the Pierson laboratory was supported by grants NAS9— ary metabolism in simulated microgravity: beta-lactam production by Strep-
02078, NAG2-1378, NCC 2-1362, NAG9-1350, and PWC 111-30-40-97 tomyces clavuligerus. J- Ind. MiCTObiOI- 18122—25-
from N AS A. 30. Fang, A., D. L. Pierson, S. K. Mishra, D. W. Koenig, and A. L. Demain.
1997. Gramicidin S production by Bacillus brevis in simulated microgravity.
Curr. Microbiol. 34:199—204.
REFERENCES 31. Fang, F. C., s. J. Libby, N. A. Buchmeier, J. Switala, J. Harwood, and D.
1. Alpatov, A., Y. Il’in, V. Antipov, and M. Tairbekov. 1988. Biological exper- Guiney- 1992. The alternative sigma factor KatF (RpoS) regulates Salmo- U
iments on COSMOS_1887_ Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 23:26—32. nella Virulence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:11978—11982. O
2_ Audia, J, P., C. C. Webb, and J. w. Foster. 2001_ Breaking through the acid 32. Foster, J. W., and M. P. Spector. 1995. HOW Salmonella survive against the E
barrier: an orchestrated response to proton stress by enteric bacteria. Int. odds. Annu. ReV- MiCTObiOI- 493145—174 2
J_ Med. Microbiol. 291:97—106. 33. Freed, L., and G. Vunjak-Novakovic. 2000. Tissue engineering bioreactors, O
3. Beeson, J. G., S. J. Rogerson, B. M. Cooke, J. C. Reeder, W. Chai, A. M. P- 143—159 1” R- P- Lanza, R- Langer, and J- Vacanti (ed.), Principles 0f 8
Lawson, M. E. MolyneuX, and G. V. Brown. 2000. Adhesion of Plasmodium tissue engineering. 2nd ed. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, Calif. CD
falcipamm-infected erythrocytes t0 hyaluronic acid in placental malaria. 34- Freed, L- E, R- Langer, 1- Martin, N- R- Pellis, and G- Vunjak-Novakovic. 0-
Nat. Med. 6:86—90. 1997. Tissue engineering of cartilage in space. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA :4‘
4. Berrier, C., M. Besnard, B. Ajouz, A. Coulombe, and A. Ghazi. 1996. 9431388543890 0
Multiple mechanosensitive ion channels from Escherichia coli, activated at 35- Freed, L- E, and G- Vunjak-Novakovic. 1997- Microgravity tissue engineer- 3
different thresholds of applied pressure. J . Membr. Biol. 151:175—187. ing. In Vitro C611 DeV- BiOl- Anim. 333381—385 3'
5. Berrier, C., A. Coulombe, C. Houssin, and A. Ghazi. 1989. A patch-clamp 36- G30, H', P- 5- Ayyaswamy, and P- Ducheyne. 1997- Dynamics Of a micro— 3::
study of ion channels of inner and outer membranes and of contact zones carrier particle in the simulated microgravity environment Of a rotating-wall :0.
of E. coli, fused into giant liposomes. Pressure-activated channels are 10- vessel. Micrograv. SCi- TGChHOI- 101154-165 Q
calized in the inner membrane. FEBS Lett. 259:27_32_ 37. Gao, Q., A. Fang, D. L. Pierson, S. K. Mishra, and A. L. Demain. 2001. 3
6. Blount, P. 2003. Molecular mechanisms of mechanosensation: big lessons Shear stress enhances microcin 1317 pdeUCtiOIl in a rotating W311 bioreac- 3
from small cells. Neuron 37:731_734_ tor, but ethanol stress does not. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 56:384—387. 0'
7_ Blount, P” and P. C, Moe. 1999_ Bacterial mechanosensitive channels: 38. Gitai, Z., and L. Shapiro. 2003. Bacterial cell division spirals into control. a
integrating physiology, structure and function. Trends Microbiol. 7:420— PTOC- Natl. Acad. SCi- USA 10017423-7424- U)
424_ 39. Guo, P., A. M. Weinstein, and S. Weinbaum. 2000. A hydrodynamic mech- 3
8_ Blount, P” S. 1, Sukharev, P. C, Moe, B. Martinac, and C, Kung. 1999_ anosensory hypothesis for brush border microvilli. Am. J . Physiol. Ser. F 'O
Mechanosensitive channels of bacteria. Methods Enzymol. 294:458—482. 27911369843712. '1
9_ Blount, P” S. 1, Sukharev, P, C. Moe, M, J, Schroeder, H, R, Guy, and C. 40. Hamill, O. P., and B. Martinac. 2001. Molecular basis of mechanotrans— (Q
Kung. 1996. Membrane topology and multimeric structure of a mechano— duction in living CGHS- Physiol. RGV- 31:685-740. 0
sensitive channel protein of Escherichia coli. EMBO J . 15:4798—4805. 41- Hammond, T- G'a E- Benes, K- C- O’Reilly, D- A- W0“, R- M- Linnehan, A- :5
10. Brooks, D. E., and T. J. Trust. 1983. Enhancement of bacterial adhesion by Taher, J- H- Kaysen, P- L- Allen, and T. J. Goodwin. 2000. Mechanical L
shear forces: characterization of the haemagglutination induced by Aero- culture conditions effect gene expression: gravity-induced Changes on the g
monas salmonicida strain 438. J . Gen. Microbiol. 129:3661—3669. space shuttle. Physiol. Genomics 3:163—173. C
11. Brooks, D. E., and T. J. Trust. 1983. Interactions of erythrocytes With 42- Hammond, T- Ga and J- M- Hammond. 2001. Optimized suspension cul- CD
bacteria under shear. Ann. N. Y. Acad, Sci. 416:319—331_ ture: the rotating-wall vessel. Am. J . Physiol. Ser. F. 281:F12—F25. Q
12. Cai, Z., J . Xin, D. M. Pollock, and J . S. Pollock. 2000. Shear stress—mediated 43. Hammond, T. G., F. C. Lewis, T. G. Goodwin, R. M. Lennehan, D. A. Wolf, M
NO production in inner medullary collecting duct cells. Am. J . Physiol. Ser. K. P. Hire, W. C. Campbell, E. Benes, K. C. O’Reilly, R. K. Globus, and (p
F 279:F270—F274. J. H. Kaysen. 1999. Gene expression in space. Nat. Med. 4:359. ""
13. Reference deleted. 44. Hecker, M., and U. Volker. 2001. General stress response of Bacillus subtilis B
14. Castro, V. A., A. N. Thrasher, M. Healy, C. M. Ott, and D. L. Pierson. 2004. and other bacteria. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 44:35—91. _\
Microbial characterization during the early habitation of the International 45. Hengge-Aronis, R. 2000. The general stress response in Escherichia 6011', p. N
Space Station. Microb. ECOL, in press. 161—178. In G. Storz and R. Hengge-Aronis (ed.), Bacterial stress re- 0'
15 . Cavicchioli, R., T. Thomas, and P. M. Curmi. 2000. Cold stress response in sponses. ASM Press, Washington, DC. ‘<
Archaea. Extremophiles 4:321—331. 46. Hengge-Aronis, R. 2002. Recent insights into the general stress response (Q
16. Ciferri, 0., O. Tiboni, G. Di Pasquale, A. M. Orlandoni, and M. L. regulatory network in Escherichia coli. J . Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. g
Marchesi. 1986. Effects of microgravity on genetic recombination in Esch- 42341—346. U)
erichia coli. Naturwissenschaften 73:418—421. 47. Hymer, W. C., R. E. Grindeland, T. Salada, R. Cenci, K. Krishnan, C. H‘
17. Reference deleted. Mukai, and S. Nagaoka. 1996. Feeding frequency affects cultured rat pitu-
18. Coynault, C., and F. Norel. 1999. Comparison of the abilities of Salmonella itary cells in low gravity. J . Biotechnol. 47:289—312.
typhimurium rpoS, aroA and rpoS aroA strains to elicit humoral immune 48. Ingber, D. 1999. HOW cells (might) sense microgravity. FASEB J . 13:S3—
responses in BALB/c mice and to cause lethal infection in athymic BALB/c S15.
mice. Microb. Pathog. 26:299—305. 49. Ingber, D. E. 1997. Integrins, tensegrity, and mechanotransduction. Gray.
19. Coynault, C., V. Robbe-Saule, and F. Norel. 1996. Virulence and vaccine Space Biol. Bull. 10:49—55.
potential of Salmonella typhimurium mutants deﬁcient in the expression of 50. Ingber, D. E. 2003. Mechanosensation through integrins: cells act locally
the RpoS (sigma S) regulon. Mol. Microbiol. 22:149—160. but think globally. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:1472—1474.
20. Creasy, R., and R. Resnik. 1984. Maternal—fetal medicine: principles and 51. Isberg, R. R., and P. Barnes. 2002. Dancing With the host; ﬂOW-dependent
practice. The W. B. Saunders C0., Philadelphia, Pa. bacterial adhesion. Cell 110:1—4.
21. Demain, A. L., and A. Fang. 2001. Secondary metabolism in simulated 52. J chanson, K., P. L. Allen, F. Lewis, L. A. Cubano, L. E. Hyman, and T. G.
microgravity. Chem. Rec. 1:333—346. Hammond. 2002. Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene expression changes during
22. Dickson, K. J. 1991. Summary of biological spaceﬂight experiments With rotating wall vessel suspension culture. J . Appl. Physiol. 93:2171—2180.
cells. ASGSB Bull. 4:151—260. 53. Kacena, M. A., P. E. Leonard, P. Todd, and M. W. Luttges. 1997. LOW
23. Dintenfass, L. 1986. Execution of “ARC” experiment on space shuttle gravity and inertial eifects 0n the growth of E. coli and B. subtilis in semi-
“Discovery” STS 51-C: some results on aggregation of red blood cells under solid media. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 68:1104—1108.
zero gravity. Biorheology 23:331—347. 54. Kacena, M. A., G. A. Merrell, B. Manfredi, E. E. Smith, D. M. Klaus, and
24. Ernstrom, G. G., and M. Chalﬂe. 2002. Genetics of sensory mechanotrans— P. Todd. 1999. Bacterial growth in space ﬂight: logistic growth curve pa-
duction. Annu. ReV. Genet. 36:411—453. rameters for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotech-
25. Escolar, L., J. Perez-Martin, and V. dc Lorenzo. 1999. Opening the iron n01. 51:229—234.

"
"17","VOL. 68, 2004 EFFECTS OF MICROGRAVITY ON MICROORGANISMS 361

55. Kacena, M. A., E. E. Smith, and P. Todd. 1999. Autolysis of Escherichia coli 82. Nickerson, C. A., C. M. Ott, J . W. Wilson, R. Ramamurthy, C. L. LeBlanc,
and Bacillus subtilis cells in low gravity. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 52: K. Honer zu Bentrup, T. Hammond, and D. L. Pierson. 2003. Low-shear
437—439. modeled microgravity: a global environmental regulatory signal affecting

56. Kacena, M. A., and P. Todd. 1999. Gentamicin: effect on E. coli in space. bacterial gene expression, physiology, and pathogenesis. J . Microbiol.
Micrograv. Sci. Technol. 12:135—137. Methods 54:1—11.

57. Klaus, D., S. Simske, P. Todd, and L. Stodiek. 1997. Investigation of space 82a.Nickers0n, C. A., and C. M. Ott. 2004. A new dimension in modeling
ﬂight effects on Escherichia coli and a proposed model of underlying phys— infectious disease. ASM News 70:169—175.
ical mechanisms. Microbiology 143:449—455. 83. Ott, C. M., R. J. Bruce, and D. L. Pierson. Microbial characterization

58. Klaus, D. M. 2001. Clinostats and bioreactors. Gravity Space Biol. Bull. aboard spacecraft: evaluation of the Mir space station. Microb. Ecol. in
14:55—64. press.

59. Klaus, D. M. 1998. Microgravity and its implications for fermentation 84_ Pina, B., J FernandepLarrea, N, Garcia-Reyer0, and F, Z, Idrissi, 2003_
biotechnology. Trends Biotechnol. 16:369-373- The different (sur)faces 0f Raplp. Mol. Genet. Genomics 268:791—798.

60. Klaus, D. M- 2002- Space microbiology: micrqgravity and microorganism, 85. Pivetti, C. D., M. R. Yen, s. Miller, w. Busch, Y. H. Tseng, I. R. Booth, and
p- 2996-3004- In G- BlttOIl (6d), EDCYCIOPGdla 0f enVironmental mICTObl- M. H. Saier, Jr. 2003. Two families of mechanosensitive channel proteins.
ology. J ohn Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY. Microbiol. Mol, Biol. Rev. 67:66—85.

61- K1395, D Mn P: TOdd, and A- Sehatz. 1998- Functional weightlessness 86. Poolman, B., P. Blount, J. H. Folgering, R. H. Friesen, P. C. Moe, and T.
during ClanTOtathH 0f cell suspens1ons. AdV- Space Res. 21:1315—1318- van der Heide. 2002. How (10 membrane proteins sense water stress? M01.

62- Reference deleted- Microbial. 44:889—902.

63- Lange,.R., and R- Hengge-Aronis. .1991; Identiﬁeatien oﬂacentr 31 11981113191“ 87. Rowbury, R. J. 2001. Extracellular sensing components and extracellular
0f stationary-phase gene express10n 1n ESCthhla 601‘- MOl- Microbiol. induction component alarmones ive earl warnin a ainst stress in Esch- U
549 59 'h' l' Ad M' b Ph ' lg44 215 y257 g g 0

- —.- . . . . erzczacoz. V. icro. ys1o. : — .

64- thchme, L"" N- Mqattl, G-Fasset, G' Richmlley, J' Templler, and R- 88. Sansonetti,P. 2002.Host-pathogeninteractions: the seduction of molecular E
Tlxador. 1986. Antibiotic act1V1ty in space. Drugs Exp. Clin. Res. 12:933— cross talk. Gut 50(Suppl. 3):III2—III8. %
938' . 89. Schwarz, R. P., D. A. Wolf, and T. Trinh. June 1991. Rotating cell culture CD

65. Lesnyak, A., G. Sonnenfeld, L. Avery, I. Konstantniova, M. Rykova, D. vessel. US. patent 5,026,650. Q_
Meshkov, and T' Orlova. 1996' Eﬂect Of SLS'2 spaceﬂight on immunologic 90. Stock, U. A., and J . P. Vacanti. 2001. Cardiovascular physiology during fetal CD
pg}1r ameters Of rafts. J' Appl. Phys1ol..81:178—182. . . development and implications for tissue engineering. Tissue Eng. 7:1—7. Q-

66' Ll’ Y"" R D' M0,"", 1' K' Sethy-Corac1, J' R' Werner, arid 1' M' Walls' 2009' 91. Stowe, R. P., D. L. Pierson, D. L. Feeback, and A. D. Barrett. 2000. Stress— :1“
Repressmn Of ribosome and tRNA synthes1s .111 secretion-defective cell5 is induced reactivation of Epstein-Barr Virus in astronauts. Neuroimmuno— O
Signaled by a novel branch of the cell integrity pathway. Mol. Cell. B101. modulation 8:51—58. 3

67 i0=3843_;851' d R H A , 1994 Th 1 f h , f , 92. Sukharev, S. I., P. Blount, B. Martinac, and C. Kung. 1997. Mechanosen- 3

' oewen, ,"" an ', engge- roms. , ' e to e O t es1gnia actor Sigma sitive channels of Escherichia 6011': the MscL gene, protein, and activities. """"
S (KatF) in bacterial global regulation. Annu. ReV. Microbiol. 48:53—80. Annu Rev Ph siol 59'633—657 '9
68 Reference deleted ' .' y ' I . ' . . Q
69. M h M S1. h d M k l 1996 E . l l . 93. Takahashi, A., K. OhnlShl, S. Takahashl, M. Masukawa, K. Seklkawa, T. 3
' fa .anl, "" J' auc ’ an. J', 23 2119821, I givlironmlenta rgggiheltizn Amano, T. Nakano, S. Nagaoka, and T. Ohnishi. 2001. Differentiation of
O Vlru ence gene express10n in .SC erzc la 601’ .a mane a, an zge a Dictostelium discoideum vegetative cells into spores during Earth orbit in 3
spp., p. 2803—2815. In F. C. Neidhardt, R. Curtiss 111, J . L. Ingraham, _ C-
. . . . space. Adv. Space Res. 28.549—553. ﬂ
E. C. C. Lin, K. B. Low, B. Magasanik, W. S. Reznikoff, M. Riley, M. 94 T . . -
. . . . aylor, G., I. Konstantlnova, G. Sonnenfeld, and R. Jennings. 1997. g)
Schaechter, and H. E. Umbarger (ed.), Escherichia call and Salmonella: Ch . . . . U)
. . anges 1n the immune system during and after spaceﬂight. Adv. Space
cellular and molecular biology, 2nd ed., V01. 2. ASM Press, Washington, Biol Med 61—32 3
DC. ' ' ' ' . . . . -
70. Manko, V., V. Kordyum, L. Vorob’yev, N. Konshin, and G. Nechitaylo. 1986. 95' Taylor, G' R' 1974.,Sp2.1ce microbiology. Annu. Rev. MlcrObIOl' 28421—131 2
. . . . 96. Thevenet, D., R. D An, and P. Bouloc. 1996. The SIGNAL experiment in (Q
Changes over time in Proteus vulgarzs cultures grown in the ROST-4M2 . . . . . . .
. . . BIORACK: ESCheI’lChla call in micrograV1ty. J . Biotechnol. 47 :89—97. \
deV1ce 0n the Salyut-7 space station, p. 3—10. In K. Sytnik (ed.), Sapce 97 Thomas W E E Trintchina M Forero V Vogel and E V Sokurenko O
0 0 . ’ ’ u , I I, I , I , I , I I I
33:23}, and biotechnology. a COHCCUOH Of papers. Naukov Dumka, Kiev, 2002. Bacterial adhesion to target cells enhanced by shear force. Cell 2
. ' 109:913—923

71. Martmac, B., M. Buechner, A. H. Delcour, J. Adler, and C. Kung. 1987. , ' , , , , CD
Pressure-sensitive ion channel in Escherichia 6011'. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98' Tlxader, R"" G' Richmlley, G. .Gasset,’ J' Templler, J' Bes, N' Moatt1,.ahd.L. E
US A 8 432974301. Lapchlne: 1985..Study .of Ihinihium inhibitory concentration of antibiotics Q)

72. Mattoni, R. 1968. Space ﬂight effects and gamma radiation interaction on Eigfgfrﬁe?lt§$7tig 17115111tr0 in space (cytos 2 experiment) AVlat' Space Q

th d'dt' fl 'bt': l"" t.B"" ' ""_'
%§?§)2_26138.ln uc ion 0 ysogenic ac eria a pre immary repor 10sc1ence 99. Tsao, Y., E. Boyd, D. A. Wolf, and G. F. Spaulding. 1994. Fluid dynamics 8

73_ McCann, M. P., J. P. Kidwell, and A. Matin. 1991_ The putative sigma w1th11(n a rotating bioreactor in space and Earth enVironments. J . Spacecraft -
factor KatF has a central role in development of starvation-mediated gen- ROC ets 31937—943” B
eral resistance in Escherichia coli. J . Bacteriol. 173:4188—4194. 100' Reference deleted. , , , , , _\

74_ McLean, R. J. C., J. M. Cassanto, M. B. Barnes, and J. H. K00. 2001_ 101. Unsworth, B. R., and P. I. Lelkes. 1998. Growmg tissues in micrograV1ty. N
Bacterial bioﬁlm formation under microgravity conditions. FEMS Micro— Nat. Med. 4901—901 . . . C-
biol. Lett. 195315419 102. Urban, J. E. 2000. Adverse effects of micrograV1ty 0n the magnetotactic <

75 _ Mehta, S. K., R. J COhI‘S, B. Forghani, G. Zerbe, D. H. Gilden, and D. L. bacterium Magnetospiri'llium mqgnetotacticum. Acta Astronaut. 47:775—780. (Q
Pierson. 2004. Stress—induced subclinical reactivation of varicella zoster 103- Velkinann, D' 1988- MicrograV1ty and the 0rgan1sms:results 0f the Spacelab C
Virus in astronauts. J . Med. Virol. 72:174—179. 1111551911 D1- Acta Astronau. 17:267—270- . 8

76. Mehta, s. K., R. P. Stowe, A. H. Feiveson, s. K. Tyring, and D. L. Pierson. 104- V0123 P- A- 1990-.My0010gy studles 1n Space-.My00path010gla 109:89-98- . .—..
2000. Reactivation and shedding of cytomegalovirus in astronauts during 105- VunJak-Novakowc, G', N- Searby, J- De LUIS, and L- E- Freed. 2002- M1-
spaceﬂight. J_ Infect. Dis. 182:1761—1764. crogravity studies of cells and tissues. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 974:504—517.

77_ Reference deleted. 106. Wilson, J. W., C. M. Ott, R. Ramamurthy, S. Porwollik, M. McClelland,

78. Mishra, S. K., and D. L. Pierson. 1992. Space ﬂight: effects on microor- D- L- Pierson, and C- A- Nickerson. 2002- Low-shear modeled microgravity

anisms .53—60, In J , Lederber ed. Enc C10 edia of microbiolo V01. alters the Salmonella enterica serovar T himurium stress res onse in an
EA (1’13 p s g(c)’1f y p gy’ R S'd d t A 1E 'yp M' 6168540185416
_ ca emic 1‘6SS,IIIC., an Diego, ai _ p0 - 111 epen €11 11121111161“. pp . IlVlIOIl. 1C1‘O 10 . Z — .

79. Nickerson, C. A., and R. Curtiss III. 1997. Role of sigma factor RpoS in 107- Wilson, J- W” R- Ramamurthy, 5- POI'WOHik, M- McClelland, T- Hammond,
initial stages of Salmonella typhimurium infection. Infect. Immun. 65:1814— P. Allen, C. M. Ott, D. L. Pierson, and C. A. Nickerson. 2002. Microarray
1823 analysis identiﬁes Salmonella genes belonging to the low-shear modeled

80. Nickerson, C. A., T. J. Goodwin, J. Terlonge, C. M. Ott, K. L. Buchanan, microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:13807—13812.

W. B. Uicker, K. Emami, C. L. Cedor, R. Ramamurthy, M. S. Clarke, T. 108. Zhou, X. L., A. F. Batiza, S. H. Loukin, C. P. Palmer, C. Kung, and Y.
Hammond, and D. L. Pierson. 2001. Three-dimensional tissue assemblies: Saimi. 2003. The transient receptor potential channel on the yeast vacuole
novel models for the stud of Salmonella atho enesis. Infect. Immun. is mechanosensitive. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:7105—7110.
69 7106 7120 y p g 109 Z M d V P 11 1988 I d ' h l '

: — . . oratti, ., an . etroni i. . on-con ucting c anne s in a gram-

81. Nickerson, C. A., C. M. Ott, S. J. Mister, B. J. Morrow, L. Burns-Keliher, positive bacterium. FEBS Lett. 240:105—109.
and D. L. Pierson. 2000. Microgravity as a novel environmental signal 110. Zoratti, M., V. Petronilli, and I. Szabo. 1990. Stretch-activated composite
affecting Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium Virulence. Infect. Im- ion channels in Bacillus subtilis. Biochem.Biophys.Res.Commun.168:443—
mun. 68:3147—3152. 450.

"
