"","x"
"1","OPEN aACCESS Freely available online @ PLUS one
The Mice Drawer S stem (MDS) Experiment and the
Space Endurance Record Breaking Mice
Ranieri Cancedda”, Yi Liu‘, Alessandra Ruggiu‘, Sara Tavella‘, Roberta Biticchi‘, Daniela Santucciz,
Silvia Schwartzz, Paolo Ciparelli3, Giancarlo Falcetti3, Chiara Tenconi3, Vittorio Cotronei4,
Salvatore Pignataro4
1Universita’ degli Studi di Genova & Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy, 2|stituto Superiore di Sanita’, Behavioural Neurosciences Section,
Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Roma, Italy, 3Tha|es Alenia Space, Vimodrone (Ml), Italy, 4AS| - Agenzia Spaziale Italiana, Roma, Italy

The Italian Space Agency, in line With its scientiﬁc strategies duration mission up to date is the one by Valeri Polyakov a
and the N ational Utilization Plan for the International Space Russian astronaut Who lived for 438 days on the Mir Space Station
Station (ISS), contracted Thales Alenia Space Italia to design and in the 90’s [2]. Today, the ISS astronauts are the main target of
build a spaceﬂight payload for rodent research on ISS: the Mice the studies about the microgravity effects on human body in light
Drawer System (MDS). The payload, to be integrated inside the of the forecasted long duration future space ﬂights, as a trip to
Space Shuttle middeck during transportation and inside the Mars could be. The observed effects of the space environment on
Express Rack in the ISS during experiment execution, was the human body are numerous: the first that become evident is the
designed to function autonomously for more than 3 months and to one on blood circulation. On Earth, the heart distributes blood
involve crew only for maintenance activities. In its first mission, throughout the body and gravity helps to drawn blood to the lower
three Wild type Mt) and three transgenic male mice over- limbs. In space, the heart is still programmed to work as on Earth
expressing pleiotrophin under the C0ht1‘01 Of a bone-speciﬁc but the force to pull body ﬂuids down is missing. As result the zero-
promoter (PTN-Tg) were housed in the MDS- At the time Of gravity condition causes in the astronauts a characteristic facial
launch, animals were Q-months Old- MDS reached the 188 Oh edema, Whereas legs became thinner because blood can only be
board 0t Shuttle Discovery Flight 17A/STS‘128 on August 28th; pumped there by the heart With no help from gravity [3]. Some
2009- MDS returned to Earth on November 27th» 2009 With studies showed a decrease in heart rate in rats [4] as well as in
Shuttle Atlantis Flight ULF3/STS-129 after 91 days, performing humans [5]. Other reported effects on blood circulation include a
the longest permanence of mice in space. Unfortunately, during decreased plasma volume [6,7] followed by a post-ﬂight hypovo-
the MDS mission, one PTN-Tg and tWO Wt mice died due to lemia [8] and a post-ﬂight postural hypotension [5]. Bone tissue is
health status or payload-related reasons. The remaining mice a structure designed in response to mechanical stimuli and it can
showed a normal behavior throughout the experiment and adapt during life toward more efﬁcient mechanical performances.
appeared in excellent health conditions at landing. During the Space exposure can alter the delicate balance of homeostasis of
experiment, the mice health conditions and their water and food weight-bearing bones in normal Earth gravity environment [9’10]
consumption were daily checked. Upon landing mice were and be the cause of a spaceﬂight osteopenia [l 1]. It has been
sacrificed, blood parameters measured and tissues dissected for reported that after a l80-day spaceﬂight the principal bone
subsequent analysis. To obtain as much information as possible on formation parameters were decreased while bone resorption
microgravity-induced tissue modifications, we organized a Tissue markers were increased [12] especially in weight-bearing bones
Sharing Program: 20 research groups from 6 countries partici- [9910,12]. Further studies showed that microgravity caused an
patecl. In order to distinguish between possible effects of the MDS increase in osteoclast-mediated resorption of bone resulting in an
housing conditions and effects due to the near-zero grewlty increased osteoblast apoptosis [1 l]. Skeletal muscle is another
enVironment, a ground replica of the thght experiment was tissue strongly affected by microgravity. In 2008 Tesch and
performed at the University Of Genova. Control tissues were coworkers found that, even after a short time in orbit, a reduction
collected also from mice maintained on Earth in standard
Vivarium cages. —

Citation: Cancedda R, Liu Y, Ruggiu A, Tavella S, Biticchi R, et al. (2012) The Mice
, Drawer System (MDS) Experiment and the Space Endurance Record-Breaking

IntI'OdUCtIOH Mice. PLoS ONE 7(5): e32243. doi:10.1371/journa|.pone.0032243
Effect Of Microgravity 0n the Human Body ESXSZiJClerey M. Gimble, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, United States

Humans, hke other hYmg organisms on the planet Earth, have Received November 21, 2011; Accepted January 22, 2012; Published May 29,
evolved by adapting their body biological structures and functions 2012
to the 'graV1tational ﬁeld Of Earth. Weightlessness (or zem-g) is the Copyright: © 2012 Cancedda et al. This is an open-access article distributed
COhdltloh that eXlStS When a bOdY experiences only the acceler- under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
ation that deﬁnes its inertial trajectory, or the trajectory of a pure unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
free-fall. The space weightless environment affects about every original author and source are credited.
function of the human body. Indeed, space adaptation involves FUHdinfﬁ The authors haVe “0 support or funding to report.
some very complex Changes in the human tissues and organs. Competing Interests: The authors have read the journal’s policy and have the
Although these Changes can cause serious health problems both in following conflicts: P.C., G.F. and CT. are employed by the commercial company

. . . (Thales Alenia Space) appomted by ASI to develop and to bunld the MDS payload.

space and on return to Earth, espec1ally Wlth increased space There are no patents, products in development or marketed products to declare.
permanence, in most cases, their effects are only temporarily This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing
disabling and, after their return to Earth, astronauts normally re- data and materials, as detailed online in the Wide for aUthOVS-
adapt quickly to the Earth’s gravity environment [1]. The longest * E-mail: ranieri.cancedda@unige.it
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 1 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"2","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment
of muscle function was already detectable and that the longer the only one allowing the testing of a wide range of wild-type and
mission time was extended, the more the muscle function mutant animals, a re1ative1y1arge animal number per ﬂight, and a
worsened. Indeed, the ﬁbers within the muscle itself were aﬂected reduced demand on shuttle resources and crew time during the
[13]. AntigraVity muscles, such as soleus and gastrocnemius mission. Mice are the vertebrate species most commonly used for
quadriceps, as well as extensor muscles [14—16], are the most scientiﬁc research; since their size is approximately 10% of that of
aﬂected by the space permanence. Furthermore, the near-zero a rat, mice can live in a much smaller area and consume a reduced
graVity environment has been reported to aﬂect gene transcription quantity of food, water and oxygen. Moreover, the reduced mass
and protein translation in the muscle cells [14,15]. Systemic of an adult mouse (about 30 grams) permits the use of a
factors, such as space related altered hormone production and signiﬁcantly higher number ofanimals, thus increasing the amount
metabolic changes also contribute to the muscle mass loss. An of acquirable data and the statistic signiﬁcance of the experiments.
important consequence of the microgravity exposure detectable In addition, the employment of mice results in other practical
during the post-ﬂight period is an increased muscle fatigue. advantages such as low cost, ease of handling and fast
Persistent ﬁber necrosis, interstitial edema, and activation of reproduction rate. Given the remarkable similarity between the
macrophages have been observed even weeks after landing [15]. mouse and the human genome, mice are widely considered the
Spaceﬂight surely has an impact on more than cardio-eirculation, best model of inherited human disease as well as congenital
bone and muscle physiological functions. For example, one should defects. With the advent of the genetic engineering technology,
also consider the risk bound to the observed deterioration of the genetically modiﬁed mice can be generated and can provide
immune system resulting in a secondary immunodeﬁciency that models for a range of human diseases. Due to the different life
can lead to increased infections or autoimmunity [17]. Further spans of the two species, results based on a few months of
studies on the immune system performed by Gridley and observations in mice could be comparable to results based on
colleagues showed a reduction of T-lymphocytes of mice after many years of observations in humans.

13 days in space, thus demonstrating that microgravity has a
signiﬁcant eﬂect on T cell distribution, function, and gene |ntemationa| Tissue Sharing Program (TSP)
expression after a short-term spaceﬂight. Experiments performed Since the initial conception of the MDS, we realized that
Oh thymus revealed an effect on the expression Of cancer related sharing tissues of the ﬂight mice could provide data on the effect of
genes, indicating a possible increase of carcinogenesis [18]. long duration spaceﬂight in multiple physiological systems.
Moreover, the potential for astronauts to develop cancer could Therefore a Tissue Sharing Program (TSP) was established and
be enhanced by alterations in natural killer cell function, since the MDS experiment was planned to contribute data on
after space ﬂight the number and cytotoxic activity of natural killer microgravity eﬂects on the skeletal, cardiovascular, and immune
cells was reduced [i7]' Furthermore, other studies have shown a systems, liver and kidney functions as well as other physiological
decrease in the proc1uction or function Of speciﬁc cytokines and systems. Thus, a TSP was organized by ASI with contributes from
chemokines, such as interferon oc/ﬂ [19] anel tumor necrosis factor European Space Agency (ESA), National Aeronautics and Space
alpha (TNF-oc) [20]. In addition, the impairment of the immune Administration (N AS A), Japanese Space Agency (ISA) and the
system during spaceﬂight can also dramatically alter the body Canadian Space Agency (USA) in order to ensure the maximal
ability to repair itself following a cutaneous or intrinsic wounding s cientiﬁc output of the space mission samples over expensive and
[21]“ . . . . rare occasioned life science experiments. The program involved 20
D uring a space ﬂight mission, astronauts d0 hOt receive the research groups from 6 countries all over the world. During the
same stimuli from the surrounding environment as on Earth. The TSP operations every eﬂort was made to harvest as many diﬂerent
central nervous system processes involved in the development of samples and types of tissue as possible from the mice in order to
the astronaut’s sense of direction are misleading and for astronauts obtain the maximum of data from this unique experiment.
it is difﬁcult to adapt to the microgravity environment. The near-
Zero graVity mainly aﬂects the vestibular apparatus inside the inner Materials and Methods
ear: this condition usually lead to a deconditioning of motion
sensors as well as of the somatosensory system, to an altered The Mice Drawer System Pay|0ad
orientation perception and to a loss of balance. This disorientation In 1998 the Italian Space Agency (ASI) Scientiﬁc Board selected
is the main symptom Of a temporary disease known as Space the MDS program, proposed by the research group at the Genova
Adaptation Syndrome (SAS), the main cause of Space MOtiOh University, within the frame of the ﬁrst A81 188 Utilization Plan.
Sickness (SMS)' As a matter Of fact, SAS is caused by a sensory The original scope of the MDS program was to develop a facility
conﬂict between inputs from Visual and tactile senses and inputs for conducting research in microgravity conditions on bone
from the vestibular organs [22]“ Thus, in order to reorganize the formation and to develop speciﬁc countermeasures for osteoporo-
orientation apparatus, some adaptive changes occur in the neural sis. Nevertheless, the MDS payload was developed by Thales
strategies to perceive spatial information. Visnal ones and Alenia Space _ Italia (Milan plant, Italy), a company developing
references become fundamental to astronauts. since in space equipment for the support of scientiﬁc experimentation in space,
“down” is where the astronaut feet are. Other tissues and organs as a general purpose facility that could be customized and used in
for which alterations due to a microgravity exposure have been the 188 by a large number of scientists for long duration
reported include: eﬂects on inner ear [23] as well as on the experiment with mice in diﬂerent research areas. Indeed, in the
formation Of rena1 stones after spaceﬂight [24]“ standard conﬁguration, MDS can house 6 mice individually up to
100 days with possible extension to 180 days on board the ISS.
Advantage Of USing Mouse MOdeIS t0 InveStigate MDS consists of the following main Subsystems a11 integrated
Microgravity Effects inside an External Container (516x421x480 mm): the Mice
Understanding mechanisms that characterize the adaptation of Chamber (MC), the Liquid Handling Subsystem (LHS), the Food
the human beings to the space environment is one of the main Delivery Subsystem (FDS), the Air Conditioning Subsystem (ACS),
goals of the astrobiology research. Spaceﬂight research should take the Illumination Subsystem (1L8), the Observation Subsystem
advantages of mice as an animal model since this species is the (088) and the Payload Control Unit (PCU) (Figure 1). The Mice
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 2 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"3","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment

Chamber is diVided in 2 habitats. Each habitat permits the and dark periods, by means of 6 Video cameras (one camera/cage).
accommodation of the items necessary to provide 3 individually Video data are acquired from 1 camera at a time and can be used
housed mice with basic services such as three metallic cages each to check mice health status and behaVior as well as to check cage
one with a 116 X98 mm ﬂoor area (conﬁguration ﬂown in the ﬁrst internal conditions and food presence. The duration and the start
mission with one mouse/cage), three food envelopes, each one time of each observation session can be programmed according to
including two food bars, three drinking valves for water delivery, the scientiﬁc protocol. Depending on the “Visibility condition” of
three cameras for Video observation, white and infrared LED’s for the ISS from a ground-station, acquired video data can be
illumination and sensors for air composition monitoring and transmitted to ground in near real-time or stored on board an ISS
control (temperature, rH, 002 and N H3). Cages have grids in all mass memory for a subsequent transmission. The Payload Control
four walls, permitting olfactory but not physical contact between Unit provides a high degree Of autonomy and minimizes the need
animals. According to the scientiﬁc requirements, each animal for crew intervention during experiment execution. PCU basic
habitat can also be conﬁgured as a unique cage of about tasks are the execution ofcommands sent from ground or stored in
364x98 mm ﬂoor area (to house a group of 1111ce)j 01‘ as two the MDS internal memory, the acquisition and transmission to
cages of about 178 x98 mm ﬂoor area (to house two pairs of mice) ground of telemetry data, the continuous monitoring of the
(Figure 81). The Liquid Handling Subsystem delivers drinkable experiment and facility status, the control and management of the
water to each cage 1nd1vidually by means of commercial stem environmental CODClItIOIlS important for mice WCll being (air SpCCd
activated drinking valves (made by Edstrom, Waterfors, WI) USA) and temperature, illumination levels, food delivery, control of
connected to a Main Water Tank Of about 0.5 liters capacity. The main water tank status etc.) and the management of the interfaces
water is delivered “ad libitum” (expected max. water consumption With the ISS (mainly power and data) and With the crew.
is 7 ml/day/mouse). In order to support the whole mission Biocompatibility of these subsystems were tested by hosting
duration, the internal Water Tank must be reﬁlled in orbit once animals for various durations (l4—days, 30-days, and lOO-days) at
empty (about every 10 days). The Food Delivery System supplies three payload developmental stages starting from its breadboard, a
each cage with 2 food bars for a total food mass of about 90 grams. ground prototype utilized to identify possible critical subsystems
Food bars composition can be deﬁned according to the integrated in the MDS payload, [26] t0 the engineering model and
experiment protocol and, if needed, solid drugs and additives the ﬂight model [27]-
can be integrated. The food quantity and the delivery time can be
individually programmed for each cage according to the scientiﬁc Flight Opportunity
protocol: through a computed program, mice received during all The science that can be conducted using the MDS system can
the experimental period 5 grams of food each day. Once ﬁnished, provide critical data for understanding physiological changes that
the old food bars have to be replaced by new ones through siX occur in various tissues after a long duration spaceﬂight and
openings located in the MDS Front Panel (about every 15—20 contribute information that could be used to reduce health risk to
days), in order to support the whole mission duration. During the crew members during future long duration space missions to the
ﬁrst MDS mission the food bar composition was “Composition Moon and Mars. In particular, the possibility to conduct a near
4RF21” from Mueedola Srl, Settimo Milanese, Italy (cereals lOO-days experiment with mice on board the ISS allowed to better
665%, vegetable proteins 182%, forage 75%, animal proteins improve our knowledge in the space biology ﬁeld. In its ﬁrst
35%, Vitamin and mineral mixture 32%, fats from soya oil 0,40/0 mission, MDS reached the 188 on board Of Shuttle Discovery
and amino acids 0,10/0 - metabolizable energy 2668 kCal/kg) [25]. Flight 17A/STS-128 on August 28th, 2009. MDS landed on
The Air Conditioning Subsystem generates a continuous airﬂow N ovember 27th, 2009 With Shuttle Atlantis Flight ULF3/STS-129
through the cages. Air speed is programmable in the range from after 91 dayS, thus performing the longest duration animal
0.2 to 0.3 m/ s and is used to ﬂow fresh air through the cages. experiment in space.
Generated 002 is removed and consumed 02 is injected. The
correct 002 and 02 concentrations are maintained by exchanging Animals Selection and Animal Experiment Ethical
with the ISS cabin about 5% of the total air circulating inside Approval
MDS every 2 minutes. Ejected and injected air ﬂows are ﬁltered Pleiotrophin (PTN) is a heparin-binding cytokine [28] with
by HEPA ﬁlters in order to prevent microbiological contamination different functions expressed by several types of cells in an early
from the ISS cabin to MDS and Vice-Versa. The ACS has 3150 the differentiation stage which is up-regulated in tissue injury and
important role to remove waste products (urine, feces, hairs, food wound repair. Moreover, PTN is speciﬁcally involved in bone
debris etc.) from the cages. Waste products removed by the airﬂow formation [29]) neurite outgrowth [30] and angiogenesis [31] and
are collected within Waste ﬁlters located below each cage. stimulates proliferation and differentiation of human osteopro-
Exhausted Waste ﬁlters are exchanged every 30 days. genitor cells “in Vitro” [32]. Transgenic mice selected for the MDS

The ACS controls the temperature Of the air ﬂowing through experiment over-eXpress PTN under the control of the human
the cages in the range from 25 to 3000 (lower value depends on bone speciﬁc osteocalcin promoter (PTN-Tg). Female PTN-
ISS environment conditions). Passive control of relative humidity transgenic mice present a faster bone formation process, while
is performed by means of a desiccant integrated in the Waste male mice show an increased bone mineral density. Furthermore,
ﬁlters. In standard ISS cabin conditions, the relative humidity is in ovariectomized transgenic mice the low estrogen concentration
expected to stay in the range between 40% and 70%, the real leads to a decreased bone tissue reduction compared to
value depending on the relative humidity of the air injected from ovariectomized Wt mice [33]. As these transgenic mice show an
the ISS cabin. The Illumination Subsystem implements light/dark increased bone mass and mineralization and are apparently more
cycles programmable in steps of 5 min starting from nominal 12 h protected from experimentally induced osteoporosis, we select
light/ 12 h dark. Light intensity is programmable from O to 40 luX them to investigate whether genetic elements promoting bone
in steps of 10 luX. Diffuse light is provided during light periods (no formation can also protect the mice from space related osteopo-
bright spots). In addition, infrared light sources can be switched on rosis. In particular we wanted to evaluate if PTN-Tg mice are
for mice observation during dark periods. The Observation differently susceptible to the negative effects of microgravity on
Subsystem permits the observation of mice during both, light bones compared to Wt mice and if the PTN over-eXpression could
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 3 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"4","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment
l L_a
., I- f,”
7‘: _‘, ,6"" -
Video cameras "" ' ' ~ - Iggy: y.
& illumination ‘ ‘ . . . , ? Fir-
. . w: - _ _' '- ‘ --..
compartment f . ‘ n _ ' ..‘ i- --/o .
‘l 1' ‘ - ”1'. l ’ y, --
. E -A til: 4; r1
‘1‘ ‘ la. fft
Cages - ' ‘ _ ‘4 “ I a
"" . l ' 1 ‘ ' “5 ‘~‘/. -
I ‘3' :g ‘. -5"". -. MDS
Waste ﬁlter , ' '1 _ g; ‘ "" Front Panel
compartment 7 w -
f) 47,-
Figure 1. The Mice Drawer System Flight Model.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032243.gOO1
have a potential role in counteracting bone loss observed in experiment. In these last cases only water was provided ad libitum
microgravity. Not all mouse strains are equally suitable for ﬂight while 5 g/die food was automatically provided by the MDS
experiments. Preliminary tests were performed utilizing a MDS module. During the ground and Vivarium pre-eXperimental
breadboard in order to evaluate the behaVior of different mouse period, mice were kept into IVC system cages of
strains. In contrast to mice of other strains, including the C57BU10 300 mm X160 mm X140 mm while cages of
strain, the original PTN-transgenie mice developed by Hashimoto- 330 mm><150 mm><120 mm were used for the Vivarium control
Gotoh (Kyoto, Japan) in a BDF strain and the BDF Wt mice experiment.
themselves did not tolerate well the MDS housing conditions. In all phases of the experiment (pre-ﬂight, during the ﬂight and
Considering that the demonstrated well-being of the animals post-ﬂight) handling of animals was in accordance with the
housed in the MDS breadboard was one of the most important principles expressed in the “Guide for the care and the use of
prerequisites to meet in order to be able to perform the MDS ﬂight laboratory animals” (Oﬂice of Science and Health Reports of the
experiment, at the animal Vivarium of N ational Cancer Research USA N ational Institute of Health, Bethesda, USA). The approval
Institute (IST) in Genova, the original transgenic mice with the of the MDS experiment was requested and obtained by the
BDF genetic background were backcrossed in the C57BU10 strain American Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
to obtain a strain of PTN-Tg with a C57BU10 genetic (IACUC) with protocol nOFLT-09-070(KSC) as well as by the
background. Subsequent tests performed to validate the deﬁnitive Ethics Committee of the Animal Facility of the N ational Institute
MDS payload conﬁrmed the suitability of the Wt and C57BLJ10/ for Cancer Research (Genova, Italy) and by the Public Veterinary
PTN (PTN-Tg) strains for the housing condition of the MDS Health Department of the Italian Ministry of Health (protocol nO
hardware [29]. Twenty female and 10 male C57BLJ10/PTN 4347—09/03/2009-DGSA.P.).
transgenic mice were delivered to Charles River Laboratories
(Wilmington, MA, U.S.A.) siX months prior the forecasted Shuttle Resu|ts
launch data. At the Charles River Laboratories (URL) a colony
was established from which the animals intended to be utilized for Pre-flight Operations
the ﬂight experiment and to stay on the ISS were derived starting Pre-launch operations were primarily done at the Kennedy
from embryos. Animal breeding and husbandry activities were Space Center (KSC) in the Space Life Science Laboratory (SLSL).
performed with procedures preventing possible animal infection Hardware final assembly and testing was done at the Space
disease. Fifteen 5 weeks old transgenic and fifteen wild-type male Station Processing Facility (SSPF). Pre-launch activities were
mice of the same age were shipped from URL to NASA-KSC performed by a composite team formed by staff from the ASI
Science Laboratories 3 weeks prior the forecasted launch date to MDS Program Oﬂice, the Principal Investigator Team of the
allow mice to undergo one week adaptation to the new Genova University, and the Payload Developer Team of Thales
environment and about 2 week training before final animal Alenia Space. Activities started at the SSPF on August 4th, 2009,
selection for launch operations. Repeated bi-weekly shipping were with the inspections and the functional tests of both ﬂight and the
planned in order to have mice with a correct age available also in spare MDS models (FM and FS). Following the above check,
case of Shuttle launch delays. Animals that did not participate to aimed to verify that no damage had occurred during the shipment
the ﬂight experiment were delivered to the animal facility of IST. to KSC, the cooling water circuit was ﬁlled and tested for
During the housing period at SLSL, mice were kept in rooms certiﬁcation purpose. Further certiﬁcation tasks, consisting ofmass
characterized by 20—24%? temperature, 40—60% relative humidity measurement and the execution of the leak test, were performed
and 12 hours oflight/dark cycle. Food (Mucedola srl, Milan, Italy) on the F8 on August 10th and 11th. The following day all the
and water were provided ad libitum to all mice but the animals hardware was moved to the SLSL to get started with the mission
housed in the MDS modules during ﬂight and ground control launch preparation tasks. At the SLSL, both models were
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 4 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"5","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment
integrated with their respective ground support equipment: procedures, considered on-need maintenance operations, for
mechanical (MGSE), ﬂuidic (FGSE) and electrical (EGSE) (Figure which astronauts underwent a speciﬁc pre-ﬂight training, were
SQ). the removal from the cage of an expired mouse, the Video camera

The ﬁrst scheduled launch date was August 26th. After their Cleaning, the food bar manual advancement and the Visual check
arrival at the KSC-SLSL 3 weeks prior that date, the mice were of mice and cage internal status. The on-orbit operations were
housed in special training cages reproducing in size and for food constantly supported by personnel at User Support Operations
and water delivery systems the Mice Chamber habitat of the MDS Center (USCG) in N aples, User Home Base (UHB) in Genova
payload (Figure 83). Food and water consumption was daily and Payload Support Center (PSC) in Milan and coordinated by
monitored in order to make sure that animals learned how and A81. Three Video observation sessions (2-hour each) per day were
where to ﬁnd food and water. After the training period, 6 Wt and recorded and downloaded permitting the MDS ground team to
6 PTN-Tg mice were selected for insertion in the MDS Flight check frequently mice well-being and cages internal status.
Model (FM) and Flight Spare (FS) model. Selected mice were Thanks to this function, we could save one of the mice whose paw
those that during the training gained more weight and drank more was trapped against the roof of the cage by the food bar. In this
water. Three Wt and three PTN-Tg mice were inserted in each case, the observation made by the ground that a mouse was
model. During their housing in the FM and FS models mice were blocked in a corner of its cage and the immediate intervention of
daily weighted and their food and water consumption checked. the astronaut were Of primary importance.

The two ﬂight models, already containing the animals, underwent Unfortunately, during the 3 months period on the 188, one
ﬁnal technical check of all the subsystems and the Daily Operating PTN-Tg (PTN-Tg3 at day 24) and two Wt mice (Wt?) at day 16
Table (DOT - containing the working parameters for the food and th at day 44) died. The three dead mice were removed
delivery system, the dark-light cycle of the illumination subsystem from the cage by the astronauts and cryo-conserved by placing
and other instruction relevant to the facility automatic functions) them in a £000 refrigerator. After the MDS landing, PI and
was reviewed. Eventually the models were uploaded on the MDS NASA veterinarians performed a necropsy of the dead mice.
Payload Control Unit (PCU). On August, 23rd, in preparation of The necropsy revealed that mouse Wt?) had a major spinal cord
the launch, in the primary ﬂight model FM the waste ﬁlters were lesion possibly occurred during the shuttle lift off. Due to the
replaced, the potable water system ﬁlled with 250 ml of water and difﬁculty Of making signiﬁcant observations on dead mice,
one loose food bar per cage inserted. The FM model was then which were frozen and thawed, nothing signiﬁcant could be
installed in its carrier, turned over to NASA personnel and noticed in the case of PTN-Tg3 and th mice. Nonetheless, a
transported to the launch pad 39A perinstallation on the assigned subsequent analysis of feces present in the cage of the Wt?
locker into the Discovery orbiter middeck. Following the mouse suggested that the animal could have developed a liver
announcement of a 72-hour launch scrub, due to a false indication pathology. The post—landing checking performed on the mice
from a fuel tank sensor of the STS-128, the ﬂight model was cages revealed that th died in consequence of a failure of the
returned to the MDS team. While the FM model was being food cassette system. In fact, whereas the water dispenser and
refurbished, the launch preparation procedure was repeated with the FDS were operating nominally in all other cages, a failure Of
the spare ﬂight FS model. On August 26th, the FS model carrying a Teﬂon washer, preventing the automatic movement of the
the other siX mice was turned-over to NASA for the second launch fOOd bar, was observed in the F00d Envelope (FEV) Of cage 3.
attempt scheduled on August 28th. The STS_128 launched at The remaining three mice showed a normal behaVior through-
ll.58 p.111. of August 28th, 2009, transporting to the International out the all mission and appeared in excellent health conditions
Space Station the MDS facility and its liVing payload. A detailed at landing.
description of all the principal pre-launch activities at SLSL is Water consumption was daily checked and recorded (Figure
reported in Table 1, 85). Monitoring of water consumption was critical for the control
of the animal well being in ﬂight, to conﬁrm animal death and to
On—orbit Operations and Ground Support notice and solve the problem with the animal whose paw was

During its travel to the ISS on-board the STS-128, the MDS blocked between the food bar and the cage roof. A'short chronicle
was powered and operating on “survival” mode, meaning that and a elescription of the InaJor events occurred during the on-orb1t
only the minimal functions required for mice survival and operations are reported in Table SI“
wellness were activated. Therefore, since the observation
subsystem was not operating, Visual checks to verify the mice Animal BQhaVlor During the on Orbit Phase 0f the
status were daily performed by the STS-128 crew. Since the food Mission
delivery system was one of the MDS functions that were The behavior repertoire of wild type and transgenic mice
suspended during the “survival” mode period, to ensure food housed in the MDS has been Video-captured in-ﬂight with the
availability to the mice, a food bar was inserted in each cage. MDS Observation Sub System, 6 Video cameras monitoring
Four days after launch, following the docking of the Discovery to animals in each chamber, in real time. Image sequences (sent from
the ISS, MDS was transferred from the Shuttle Middeck to the the 188 to Telespazio SpA in N aples, Italy) were downloaded and
Express Rack 4 in the Japanese Experiment Model GEM). The converted to Video (.aVi format) by using a free-software
operating mode of the system was then switched to “experiment- (VideoMatch vs 5.5.3, SICS, Italy). The behaVior patterns
autonomous”mode, thus activating all system functions. Because characterizing mice in the MDS system were analyzed during
of the automated operations of the MDS model, only a minimum the initial, middle and late phase of the 91-day experiment. An
intervention of the astronauts on the payload itself was required average of 10,500 jpg images a day (acquisition rate 10 frames/
(Figure S4). In fact, based on the preliminary tests conducted on second) for each animal taken between 00:00—02:00 a.m., 08:00—
ground with the engineered MDS model, the operation plan 10:00 a.m., 04:00—06:00 p.111. were converted in Video (Video 81)
included only few nominal maintenance operations to be of about 1 min each and carefully scored by a highly trained
executed by the crew: the potable water reﬁll scheduled to take observer using a dedicated ethological software (“The Observer”,
place every 9 days, the food cartridges replacement every 19 days N oldus, N etherlands). While vertical activity such as “rearing” or
and the waste ﬁlters replacement every 30 days [2 7]. Other “wall rearing” (standing on hind legs and placing forelimbs on the
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 5 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"6","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment

Table 1. Pre—flight operations.

Day to launch Activities (animal training and mds payload set up for launch)

—24 Arriving of 15 Wt and 15 PTN-Tg mice at SLSL and transfer of the animals to isolator cages.

—22 Transfer of 7 Wt and 7 PTN-Tg mice to the training cages.

—11 Transfer of 6 Wt and and 6 PTN-Tg trained to the Flight (FM) and the Spare (FS) MDS modules (3 Wt and 3 Tg to each

module).

—11/—6 Daily check of the models subsystems and of the health status of animals inside the FM and FS MDS modules.

—5 Replacement of the waste filter. Filling of the water system. Insertion of food bars. Transport of FM MDS to the launch pad to

be installed on the Discovery orbiter middeck. Check of the health status of animals inside the FM and FS MDS modules.

—4 Return of the FM MDS module to SLSL due to a 72 hours scrub. Removal of the mice from FM MDS, refurbishment of the FM

module as new spare payload and reinsertion of the animals.

—2 Transport of original FS MDS module to the launch pad to be installed on the Discovery orbiter middeck.

0 Launch of Shuttle Discovery with STS-128 crew on August 28th, 2009 at 11.58 pm. (EDT)

Activities begun on August 4th, 2009. Acronyms reported in Table 1 are explained in Table S3.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032243.t001
wall of the cage) as well as “digging”, were obviously Virtually Post—Ianding Activities and Tissue Sharing Program
suppressed, frequency and duration of behavior of the following Implementation
(fully chatacterized Sn grQUDd) behaV1ors, W611? observed. anel On November 27th, Shuttle Atlantis and the STS-129 crew
recorded: exploring : mov1ng around the cage; self—grooming : landed at KSC bringing back to Earth the MDS payload
Wlpmg’ IICkmg’ combing any part Of the bOdYS face washing 2 containing the mice. The MDS model was handed over by
Sdf‘explanatorYS smfﬁng 3 smfﬁng the enVlmnmemS restmg -' NASA to the MDs team and was available at the SLSL within
no. V1.81“: movements (either Closed or open eyes); eating and 150 minutes from landing. After the arrival of the payload at the
drinking : self explanatory. Moreover, several behaV1ors, Char- SLSL, mice were extracted from the cage and the post-landing
Zeteriséiccﬁf the jrjnicrograwty BILWQHmCTlE W61: lzbservfed and science operations started. Video images of the mice immediately

e 1ne ' . oating ' sw1ng1ng‘ (In t (.3 a1}? Wlt 9m 0 mg t e cage after extraction from the MDS payload Clearly show the difﬁculty
and no Visible movement; hanging : holding the bars of the of the mice in moving once returned under Earth gravity
metal top of the cage With the forelegs, stopping in this position condition (Video SQ). The TSP operations began with the
(b9? sfuiflended); pix: 11(1ng 2 1110:1711? hioldingth‘e bars 015th? immediate collection of the urine of the three live mice and the
gm 9 e cage W1 , e ore- an in -paws, on C00 16 ' measurement of their weight. In Figure 2 the pre- and post-ﬂight
grasping, surﬁng, staying, eating the COOkIe’ when present. body weight of each mouse is shown and compared with the body
Animals learned quickly to manage with microgravity environ- wei ht in f h . f h d d h . .

, , , , g crease o t e mice rom t e groun an t e Vivarium
ment using the grid to grasp and/ or direct their movements and controls (see following paragraph). It is to note the slightly
appeared to ﬁt well in space. AS long as the COOkle was present in reduced gain of weight observed in all mice housed in the MDS
the cage, they clearly showed a preference to interact With it” a loads com ared to animals maintained in standard Vivarium

tin the need to develo some ad Izoc ob'ect to insert in the p y p
sugges g . . p. J . . cages. Apparently no speciﬁc effects on the animal weight due to
cage in future missions. All mice spent most of the time in the .

. . . the near-zero graV1ty were observed. The sequence of the
proxnnity of where water and food were present in the cage. subsequent mice processing was' PTN-Tgl Wt2 and PTN-
Behavior repertoire was largely conserved in space with the . ' ’
emer ence of “ﬂoating” and frequent rolling movements Tg2. The whole processing of each mouse lasted about 90

g . . . . . ' minutes. The veterinarian drew blood from the orbital sinus and
Together With preliminary ground-based data, differences in , , , ,

. . mice were then euthanized by COQ. The follow1ng tissues were
behaV1or proﬁle between Wt and PTN-Tg mice were observed. , , , ,
. . dissected and processed according to each TSP-PI instructions:
Most notably PTN-Tg mice were apparently more active than , , ,

.1 d 1 d I 1h h h 11 bone, bone marrow, brain, calvaria, Claw, diaphragm, heart,
W1 -type contros on groun ' n space, at oug t e sma h o h sis intestine kidne liver lun muscle adductorlon us
number of animals makes impossible to carry out statistical yp p y ’ , ’ y”, , ’ g, , g. ’
anal sis for behavior arameters it a eared that PTN-T mice muscle forelimb, muscle hmdhmb’ pancreas, forelimb, Skm’

y p ’ pp g 1 h d 1 1 d ' h h h 'd

- 1 k ﬂ - h W - 11 - h 1 sp een, stomac ,a rena gan s, test1s,t ymus, trac ea,t yr01 .
consistenty ept oating moret an tones espec1a y int e ast . . . . . . . .

- d f h - F' S6 B Wh'l - (:1 After the ﬁrst three mice tissue dissection, the dissection act1V1ty
perio O t e experiment ( igure ) 1 e in water, ro ent contin ed b collectin the bone sam les from the three mice
ﬂoating behavior is generally associate with passive behavior, h u y . g P p All 1 h
anhedonia and stress response, in space it could reﬂect t at dled on 0110““ th’ TN‘ng’ th' . samp es (“Wet e
environment adaptation, being also a strategy to direct movement 350 samples in 30 boxes to be maintained ?‘t different
with reduction in energy effort. Thus, the increased ﬂoating temperatures) were. shippeel for subsequent analysis .from the
behavior in PTN-Tg mice could indicate a different coping SLShto the 20 PIs 1n 13 Cities of.6 (:hfferent countries (Figure S7).
strategy to adapt to an altered gravitational environment. On the Additional information on the distribntion Of the samples to the
other hand, grooming behavior, which is a classic index of different research groups is reported in Table SQ. A11 acronyms
displacement activity, appeared more pronounced in wild type reported are explained in Table 83'
animals again in the last period of the experiment. It is of notice _ _ _
that the ex post detailed observation of the behavior proﬁle in the Ground and Vlvarlum 1 g contrOI Experlments
days preceding the death of the two Wt mice and of the PTN-Tg A 1 g ground replica of the ﬂight eXperiment (“ground control”)
mouse did not evidenced any warning sign. was performed in the FM MDS model at the University of Genova
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 6 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"7","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment
A B
Wt mice PTN-Tg mice
35 35
A 30 A 30 +Flight PTN-Tg 1
g 25 / +Fl'ghtWt 2 3:“ 25 j , ,/”’A +Flight PTN-Tg 2
:1) 2° +Ground Wtz E” 20 +Ground PTN-Tg 1
> , . >s
E 15 +V'Var'um W E 15 {Ground PTN-TgZ
1O 1O
5 5 +Vlvarlum PTN-Tg
O 0 .
day 0 day 91 day 0 day 91
Figure 2. Body weight. Body weight increase of the flight mice and of the ground and Vivarium control mice during the 91—day MDS experiment.
Panel A): Wt mice; Panel B): PTN-Tg mice.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032243.gOOZ
from November 13rd, 2009 to February 11“, 2010. As additional type and two PTN-Tg mice) survived to the 91-day spaceﬂight,
control, tissue samples were collected also from mice maintained in represents a critical aspect of the experiment, especially for the
standard Vivarium Individual Ventilated Cages (IVC) (“Vivarium statistical reliability of the collected data. However the MDS
control”). The two diﬂerent control experiments were performed in experiment was a unique opportunity to study the microgravity
order to distinguish between a possible MDS housing effect on the long—term exposure effects on several tissues of an animal model
mice and the effect of the microgravity exposure. The animals for the and to collect interesting observations that could prepare the ﬁeld
ground control were chosen on the basis Of their capacity Of to future experiments. Hopefully future re-ﬂight of MDS will be
adaptation to the habitat. This capacity was tested by placing the possible to increase the number 0t analyzed animals thus
mice in the same training cages used for the ﬂight mice training. The increasing the signiﬁcance 0f the made observations.
ground control experiment was designed to repeat exactly
everything occurred to mice during the on—orbit experiment. Supporting Information
Therefore, two wild type and one transgenic mice, were sacriﬁced Figure S1 MDS cage interior. Interior of a cage for
at the same experimental day than the corresponding ﬂight mice . d' 'd 1 mice housin in the MDS model Details of the water
death and placed in a QOOC refrigerator. As for the ﬂight :in NI ua g . '
, , , , elivery and of the food delivery systems are shown.
experiment, all MDS hab1tat parameters, including water and food (TIF)
consumption, as well as images derived from the camera observation
system, were registered by the computer connected to the FM MDS Figure 32 MDS models. MDS FM and FS 111001618 installed on
model. The Vivarium control experiment was conducted in parallel Mechanical Ground Support Equipment With reduced Fluidic
to the ground control. In this case three wild type and three PTN Ground System Equipment mounted Oh the tOP- The MDS
transgenic mice were maintained in standard Vivarium conditions models contain already the mice and are ready to be installed ih
for the all 91 experimental days. Water and food consumption was their carrier and turned over to NASA personnel.
daily checked and data were collected to be compared to the values (TIP)
derived from the ﬂight and the ground experiments. The weight Figure S3 Training cage. Mouse inside a training cage for
increase of all ground and Vivarium experiment animals after the9l- adaptation to the new environment and training on water and
days period was determined. At the end of the 91-day experiment the food delivery systems.
TSP procedures already performed on the ﬂight animals was (TIF)
repeated on the ground and Vivarium controls animals.
Figure S4 MDS on International Space Station. Astro-
. . nauts Nicole Stott and Bob Thirsk checking the MDS payload
Dlscussmn . . .
installed into Express Rack 4 1n the Japanese model GEM) on
The Mice Drawer System project is an ASI funded program board the 188 four days after the launch of Shuttle Discovery
that was established to support long—duration scientiﬁc eXperi- (courtesy by NASA)-
ments with mice on board the International Space Station. Studies (TIP)
conducted in microgravity conditions using mice as a model may Figure S5 Water consumption data. Water consumption of
advance our knowledge on Changes occurring in various physio- mice inside the MDS ﬂight model during their permanence in the
logical systems after exposure to a near-zero graVity environment. 188.
Eventually this could also lead to a reduction of the health risk to (TIF)
crewmembers during long duration space ﬂights. The ﬁrst MDS . . . . . . .
mission lasted 91 days, marking it the longest duration animal Flgure S6 .Mlce behawor du.r1ng ﬂight P?#md' Mice
experiment in space. Observations made by analyzing the eﬂect of behaVler duririg the experimental period. A). eating act1V1ty duration,
the micro raVit eX osure on different or ans and tissues are the B) ﬂoating act1V1ty duration C) grooming act1V1ty duration.
g Y p g
subjects of some independent accompanying papers. Undoubted- (TIP)
ly, the limited number of mice (three wild type and three PTN-tg Figure S7 Tissue Sharing Program participants. Tissue
mice) that the MDS payload could house during the ﬂight, Sharing Program team at KSC-SLSL.
together with the fact that unfortunately only three mice (one wild (TIF)
® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 7 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
"8","Mice Drawer System (MDS) Experiment

Table S1 On-orbit activities. Activities on the ISS began on Acknow|edgments

September 151, 2009, four days after the launch of the Shuttle .

Discove We would like to thank all the NASA staff at the K80 and at the

ry. alternative landing site at the Edwards Air Force Base who was very helpful

(DOC) in the experiment preparation and in the post—ﬂight activities and in

Table S2 Tissue Sharing Program (TSP). Tissue Sharing addition made our stay at the SLSL and in California very pleasant and

Pro ram (TSP) involve d investi a tors and tissues the are enjoyable. A spec1al thanks to Jim Pelosi, Ramona Bober, Kelly Gattuso,

, g , g Y and the two NASA astronauts, N icole Stott and Bob Thirsk, without their

mterested 1n. dedication, the MDS mission would have been impossible. The shipment

(DOC) of all tissue samples has been made possible by the support of Altec (Turin,

. . Italy) that organized the preparation of the delivery documentation and the

Table S3 Acronyms. Acronyms reported and thelr meanmg. shipment of all the boxes containing the samples. The MDS Program is a

(DOC) program of the Italian Space Agency (A81). A81 is a public Italian

Video S1 M ous e b eh avi or during ﬂight experiment institution which purpose is to coordinate all of Italy s efforts and

d .1 b t. M b h . . 'd MDS d . investments in the space sector. ASI coordinated and fully supported the

.a1 y o. serva 1071' ouse e aV1or 1ns1 e cage urmg MDS hardware development, the MDS experiment preparation, the MDS
ﬂ1ght dally Observatlon. in—ﬂight mission preparation and execution.

(AVI)

Video S2 Mouse behavior upon landing. Mouse Wt2 AUthor contr'bUtlons

behavior immediately after extraction from MDS payload upon Conceived and designed the experiments: RC YL. Performed the

landing. experiments: YL AR ST RB. Analyzed the data: RC YL AR ST DS SS.

(AVI) Wrote the paper: RC AR ST. Contributed the MDS payload: PC GF CT.

Acted as MDS Science Mana er and MDS Pro ram Mana er res ectivel

g g g 13 Y
for the A81 and played a major role in the MDS in—ﬂight mission
preparation and execution: VC SP.

References

1. Mulavara AP, Feiveson AH, Fiedler J, Cohen H, Peters BT, et a1. (2010) 18. Gridley DS, Slater JM, Luo-Owen X, Rizvi A, Chapes SK, et a1. (2009)
Locomotor function after long-duration space ﬂight: effects and motor learning Spaceﬂight effects on T lymphocyte distribution, function and gene expressionj
during recovery Exp Brain Res 202: 6494659. Appl Physiol 106: 1944202.

2. Gundel A, Dreseher J, Spatenko YA, Polyakov W (2002) Changes in basal 19. Sonnenfeld G (2002) The immune system in space and microgravity Med Sci
heart rate in spaceﬂights up to 438 days Aviat Space Environ Med 73: 17421. Sports Exere 34; 202172027.

3. Norsk P (2005) Cardiovascular and ﬂuid volume control in humans in space 20 Woods KM, Chapes SK (1994) Abrogation of TNF-mediated cytotoxicity by
Curr Pharm Biotechnol 62 3254530. . . . . space ﬂight involves protein kinase C Exp Cell Res 211: 1714174.

4- Fuller .CA (1985) Homeostasw and 131010916211 rhythms m the rat durlng 21. Davidson JM, Aquino AM, Woodward so, Wilﬁnger ww (1999) Sustained
spaceﬂ1ght Phy51olog1st 283 8199*200- microgravity reduces intrinsic wound healing and growth factor responses in the

5. Fritsch-Yelle JM, Charles JB, Jones MM, .Wood ML (1996) Microgravity rat FASEB J 13: 3252329
decreases heart rate and arteml Pressure 1“ humans J APPl Physlol 80= 22. LacknerJR,DizioP(2006) Space motionsieknessEXp Brain Res 175 3777399.
910T914' _ _ _ _ 23. Hahn H, Muller M, Lowenheim H (2008) Whole organ culture of the postnatal

6' B210 JX’ Zhang LF’ Ma J_ (20071 AngPtCFSmOgen arid A_TlR expresswn 1n sensory inner ear in simulated microgravityj Neurosci Methods 171: 60471.
cerebral and femoral arterles durlng hlndllmb unloadlng 1n rats Aylat Space 24_ Pietrz k RA, ones A, Sams CF, Whitson P A 2007 Renal stone formation
E M d 78' 8524858 y
Dr'wcllrgnh A6 P ' _ SY 1R b D 007 P1 d bl d 1 _ among astronauts Aviat Space Environ Med 78: A9413.

7' 16 “C ’ amp.” ’ O ““0“ (2 ) asma 3‘“ 00 V0 “me 1“ 25. Mucedola website http://www.mueedola.it/UploadFiles/ﬂle/e4RF21_GLP_
space AmJ Med SCI 334: 80T85' certiﬁcatepdf Accessed 2003 Sept 23.

8' BlomqViSt CG’ BUCkey JC’ Gamay FA’ Lane LD’ Levme BD’ et al' (1994) 26 Ad mi G F 1 tti G (2002) A s1nall rodent research faeilit for ﬂi ht with
Mechanisms of post-ﬂight orthostatic intolerance] Gravit Physiol 1: P1224124. ' a ’ a CC . . y g

. columbus laboratoryj Grav1t Phy51ol 9: P3414342.

9. Colleran PN, Wllkerson MK, Bloomﬁeld SA, Suva LJ, Turner RT, et a1. (2000) 27 L' Y B' . h' R (3'11 M P' d' F R . A C dd R 2009 M'
Alterations in skeletal perfusion with simulated microgravity: a possible ' 1u ’ 1t1ee 1 ’ 1 1 ’ 1eear 1 ’ ugg1u ’ ane e a ( ) 1C6
mechanism for bone remodeling] Appl Physiol 89: 104641054. Drawer8ysti3m (MDS):.an ?tomlitedlng/bhgtd lfor suggoggng rodent research on

10. Vico L, (10114 P, Guignandon A, Lafage-Proust MH, Thomas T, et a1. (2000) mtemamm Space 512‘th” as“? 131316, YO Ogy * ' , ,

- - - - 28. Deuel TF Zhang N Yeh HJ S1los-Sant1ago I Wang ZY (2002) Plelotrophln: 21
Effects of long-term mlcrograVIty exposure on cancellous and cortlcal we1ght- _ ’ _ _ ’ _ ’ ’, _ _
bearing bones of cosmonauts Lancet 3 5 5; 160741611. cytoklne w1th dlverse functlons and a novel s1gna11ng pathway Arch Bloehem

11. Bucaro MA, Zahm AM, Risbud MV, Ayyaswamy Ps, Mukundakrishnan K, et BiOPhYS 397‘ 1624 71; . .
a1. (2007) The effect of simulated microgravity on osteoblasts is independent of 29' L1 G9 Bunn JR? Mush1pe MT? He Q Chen X (2005) Effects Of P1610_tr013h1n
the induction of apoptosis J Cell Biochem 102: 4834495. (PTN) over-expressmh on mouse long bone development, fracture heallng and

12. Caillot-Augusseau A, Lafage-Proust MH, Soler C, Pernod J, Dubois F, et a1. bone repa1r Cale1f T1ssue Int 76: 2996508 _ _ _ _
(1998) Bone formation and resorption biological markers in cosmonauts during 30- Rauvala H (1989) An 18'kd hepar 1n-b1nd1ng pr ote1n 0f developlng bram that 15
and after a 180-day space ﬂight (Euromir 95) Clin Chem 44: 5784585. dIStht from ﬁbroblast growth factors EMBO .1 8: 2933*2941-

13. Tesch PA, von Walden F, Gustafsson T, Linnehan RM, Trappe TA (2008) 31- Mikelis C) Lamprou M9 Koutsioumpa M9 Koutsioubas AG: Spymntl Z; 6.1 3.11-
Skeletal muscle proteolysis in response to short-term unloading in humans J (2011) A peptlde correspondlng to the C-termmal reg1on of ple1otroph1n 1nh1b1ts
Appl Physiol 105; 9024906. angiogenesis in V1VO and in vitroJ Cell Biochem 112: 153241543.

14. Fitts RH, Riley DR,Widriij](2000) Physiology ofamicrogravity environment 32. Yang X, Tare RS, Partridge KA, Roach HI, Clarke NM, et a1. (2003)
invited review: microgravity and skeletal muscle] Appl Physiol 89; 8237839 Induction of human osteoprogenitor Chemotaxis, proliferation, differentiation,

15. Kalb R, Solomon D (2007) Space exploration, Mars, and the nervous system and bone formation by osteoblast stimulating factor-l/pleiotrophin: osteoeon-
Arch Neurol 64: 4854490. ductive biomimetic scaffolds for tissue engineering J Bone Miner Res 18:

16. Slentz DH, Truskey GA, Kraus WE (2001) Effects of Chronic exposure to 47*57.
simulated microgravity on skeletal muscle cell proliferation and differentiation In 33. Masuda H, Tsujimura A, Yoshioka M, Arai Y, Kuboki Y, et a1. (1997) Bone
Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 37: 1484156. mass loss due to estrogen deﬁciency is compensated in transgenic mice

17. Meshkov D, Rykova M (1995) The natural cytotoxicity in cosmonauts on board overexpressing human osteoblast stimulating factor-l Biochem Biophys Res
space stations Acta Astronaut 36: 7194726. Commun 238: 5284533.

® PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 8 May 2012 | Volume 7 | Issue 5 | e32243

"
