"","x"
"1","ASTROBIOLOGY '
Volume 12, Number 11, 2012 ResearCh ArtICIe
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ast.2012.0881
Observmg the Mouse Thyrond Sphlngomyelm Under
Space COHdItIOhSZ A Case Study from the M DS
MISSIon In Comparison With HypergraVIty COHdItIOhS
E. Albi,1 F. Curcio,2 R. Spelat? A. Lazzarini}2 R. Lazzarini,‘ E. Loreti,3
|. Fem,3 and F.S. Ambesi—Impiombato2
Abstract
This is a case report of apparent thyroid structural and functional alteration in a single mouse subjected to low
Earth orbit spaceﬂight for 91 days. Histological examination of the thyroid gland revealed an increase in the
average follicle size compared to that of three control animals and three animals exposed to hypergravity (2g)
conditions. Immunoblotting analysis detected an increase in two thyroid gland enzymes, sphingomyelinase and
sphingomyelin—synthase1. In addition, sphingomyelinase, an enzyme confined to the cell nucleus in the control
animals, was found in the mouse exposed to hypogravity to be homogeneously distributed throughout the cell
bodies. It represents the first animal observation of the inﬂuence of weightlessness 0n sphingomyelin metabo-
lism. Key Words: GraVity—Lipid—Spaceﬂight—Sphingomyelin—Thyroid. Astrobiology 12, xxx—xxx.
1. Introduction periments were conducted on thyroid cells in culture. To
study whether these effects were present in vivo in the thyroid
PERTURBATIONS OF body homeostasis in astronauts largely gland, which inﬂuences cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and
depend on the deregulation of the endocrine system with nervous system function through hormone production, we
consequent hormonal disequilibrium. Unfortunately, the un— participated in the Mouse Drawer System (MDS) Tissue
derlying mechanisms are still unknown. We have recently Sharing Program by performing experiments on mice main-
demonstrated that, during a space mission, thyroid cells in tained on board the International Space Station (188) during
culture (FRTL—5 cells) did not respond to thyrotropin (TSH) the long-duration (90 days) exploration mission STS—129. The
treatment because of the Change of sphingomyelin (SM) results were compared with those obtained in hypergravity
metabolism mediated by sphingomyelinase (SMase) and SM- conditions on mice maintained in a 2g centrifuge. The study
synthase enzymes (Albi et (11., 2010) and acquired a pro- allowed us to asses the behavior of SM metabolism enzymes
apoptotic phenotype, so called because it had intermediate and Bax in vivo after the Change of gravity.
Characteristics between the quiescent and apoptotic pheno-
type (Albi et (11., 2008). In the cell membrane, SM interacts with 2. Materials and Methods
Cholesterol, phosphatidylcholine (PC), and proteins to form 2 1 Reagent
specific microdomains, called ”lipid rafts,” that act as plat- ' '
forms for specific proteins involved in signal transduction Anti-SMase, anti-SM-synthase, and anti-Bax primary an-
(Edidin, 2003). The presence of TSH receptors (TSHRS) and tibodies, horseradish peroxidase—conjugated, tetramethyl
their multimerization in lipid rafts have been demonstrated rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)—c0njugated, and ﬂuores-
(Latif et (11., 2003, 2007). Our experiments performed under cein isothiocyanate (FITC)—c0njugated secondary antibody
microgravity conditions (Texus—44 mission) showed that cells were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (CA,
released Cholesterol, SM, and TSHR t0 the culture medium USA). SDS—PAGE molecular weight standards were pur-
probably by modifying the microdomain structure (Albi et aL, chased from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA, USA).
2011). The values of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (CAMP) Chemiluminescence kits were purchased from Amersham
after treatment with TSH were significantly lower than those (Rainham, Essex, UK). Thin layer Chromatography plates
obtained in Earth’s gravity because of TSHR reduction and (silica Gel G60) were from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany); the
defect of TSH—TSHR interaction (Albi et (11., 2011). So far, ex- radioactive SM (choline-methyl 14C, 54.5 Ci/mol), PC (L—3-
1Laboratory of Nuclear Lipid BioPathology, CRABioN, Perugia, Italy.
2Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
3Institute of Pathologic Anatomy and Histology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
1

"
"2","2 ALBI ET AL.
phosphatidyl N—methyl-3H choline 1,2 dipalmitoyl, 81.0 Ci/ tivity assay, and in part fixed in 4% neutral phosphate-
mmol) were from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech (Rainham, buffered formaldehyde solution for 24 h. Thyroids were
Essex, UK); Ecoscint A was from National Diagnostic dropped with essentially random orientation in paraffin. The
(Atlanta, GA, USA). paraffin blocks were sectioned into 4 ,urn thicl< sections. All
sections were mounted on silan-coated glass slides. Each
2.2. Experimental design and animal care slide contained a pair of sections at a distance equal to
All experimental procedures were authorized by the Public 140 ,urn Between 7 and 14 pairs Of sections were sampled,
Veterinar Health De artrnent of the I talian Ministr of excluding the first and the last, and 7, 9, 11, and 13 sections
Health T3he experirnerlt was also conducted in accordince were USEd for morphological analysis whereas 8’ 10’ 12’ and
with regulations for the care and use of laboratory animals 11.1 SECUOH? were used for oirnmunoﬂuorescence analysis.
. . . . . . Tissue sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated through
and With the guidelines of the Japanese Phys1olog1cal Soc1ety. a series of x lene and e thanol washes
Furthermore, this study was also approved by the Committee y '
on Animal Care and Use at Graduate School of Medicine, 2 4 Mar holo ical anal Sis
Osaka University (No. 22-071). Finally, the protocol utilized in ' ' p g y
the study has been authorized by the Public Veterinary Health The sections were treated with the hematoxylin—eosin
De artrnent of the Italian Ministr of Health. All ex eriments (Chroma-Gesellschaft, German ) stainin method and in-
P Y P Y g
were carried out with male C57BL/ 10] mice (8 weeks old). vestigated by using inverted microscopy EUROMEX FE 2935
(ED Arnhem, the Netherlands) equipped with a CMEX 5000
H p0 ravit experiment. Three male C57BL/ 10] mice camera s stern (40x rna nification). The anal sis of the tis-
Y 9 Y Y g Y
were individually housed in the MDS, a 11.6><9.8><8.4 cm sue section size was performed by ImageFocus software.
payload developed by Thales-Alenia Space Italy (Cancedda
et (11., 2002). Food and water were supplied ad libitum. The 2.5. Protein study
MDS was launched on the Space Shuttle Discovery, within The roteins were uantified accordin to Lowr e t al
the Space Transport System (STS)-128 mission, on August 28, p . q . . g y '
2009 It was then housed in the Japanese Experimental (1951). The immunoblotting analys1s to detect SMase, SM-
° . . . . synthase, and Bax content was performed as previously
Module (Kibou) on the 188 until its return to Earth Via Space . . .
Shuttle Atlantis (STS—129 mission) on November 27, 2009 reported (Albl 6t (11., 2011) Enzyrne act1V1ty Of SMase and
(Masini e t al 2012) Onl one mouse returned to the Earth SM-synthase1 was assayed according to Albi et al. (2008). For
alive after 9'1’ days.of sgaceﬂight It was very difficult to immunoﬂuorescence analysis, sections were incubated, after
establish the cause of death because this was the first long— three washes. Wlth phosphate-buffered saline FPBS)’ Wlth
. . . . . 2 ,ug/rnL anti-SMase or ant1-SM-synthase1 primary anti-
term animal experimentation in space. It was not possible to . . . 0 . . . .
erform an autopsy on the two dead animals because they bodies diluted in a 0.5 /o solution of bov1ne serum albumin in
p t f . d' t 1 ft (1 th PBS overnight at 40C. The slides were washed three times
were no rozen 1rnme 1a e y a er ea ° . with PBS and incubated with ﬂuorochrome-conjugated
After the spaceﬂight experiment, the on-ground experiment secondar antibodies (TRITC for SMase and FITC for SM-
was also carried out at the Vivarium of the Advanced Bio- y . . . .
technology Center in Genova Italy One group of mice with synthase), diluted as primary antibodies, for 1h at room
th . d ' ° h d . 1 . temperature. After three washes with PBS, the slides were
vaeriisijhnecasgeeclaesg tile? 1:203351;]:thr:?saivlgﬁlgorﬁa Thle mounted with glycerol and coverslips. The samples were
amount of food and water supplementation and the.envi- examined under a ﬂuorescence microscope (OLYMPUS IX
. . . 51) equipped with an OLYMPUS DP 50 camera system and
ronmental conditions were Simulated for the control group to anal zed at 40x rna nification
approximate those of the ﬂight group. All analyses were y g '
conducted on the thyroid gland of one animal alive. Thyroids 2 6 Statistical anal Sis
were sampled bilaterally from each mouse killed by inhalation ' ' y
of carbon dioxide at the Life Sciences Support Facility of The experiments were conducted on the thyroid of one
Kennedy Space Center within 3—4 hours after landing. The animal for the hypogravity experiment (the only one re-
thyroid samples were either processed or frozen immediately, turned alive from the mission), three control animals for the
according to the various experimental protocols. hypogravity experiment (Vivarium 1), three animals for the
hypergravity experiment, three control animals for the hy-
Hypergravity experiment. Three mice of the same strain pergravity experiment (Vivarium 2). The immunoblotting
as those used in hypogravity experiments were maintained analysis and enzyme activity assay were repeated three
in h er ravit , with conditions similar to the MDS ex eri- times on each th roid. MeansiSD of three results for h -
YP g Y P Y Y
ment, in a 2 centrifu e in the laborator of Dr. Y. Ohira at o ravit animals and of nine results for each other ex eri-
8 g Y P g Y P
the Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. Control mice were ment are given. The significance of the differences between
similar to those reported in the hypogravity experiment the data was checked by the Student t test.
(Vivarium 2). Animals were treated, and thyroids were ob-
tained and processed with the same procedures used in the 3. Results
hypograv1ty/space experiments. Microscopy analysis performed on four histological mi-
. . crosections, as reported in llthyroid tissue treatment,” which
23' TherId tissue treatment were subjected to hematoxylin—eosin staining, showed that
The th roid lobes in art were homo enized and used for the th roid land of the animal that had been in s ace has a
Y P g Y g P
protein dosage, immunoblotting analysis, and enzyme ac- greater number of large follicles, which supports recent

"
"3","THYROID SPHINGOMYELIN IN SPACE 3
- V' f-ﬁ' .
l' q. ‘1- f ' ‘ -. LL.
: ' C: 1"" I' f
I -' -_ . l I II .1 .
i-J ""'1‘ .r‘ ' 1‘5
_-l' I:_ . Hi _
l' r -_ T‘ d _ _ I
-.;’—.- 'Il"". % IP I
r“ 1'”: ihft.; 'r ._. __ .II'
- .r - ._
A 131-.- .. . h. : -4... F‘
' u I -
i “m Vivarium 1 hypngra'urity Vivarium 2 hypergravity
FIG. 1. Morphology analysis of thyroid follicles of mice. ”Vivarium 1,” maintained in Vivarium cages (control for experi-
ment in hypogravity); ”hypogravity,” experimental animal in space; ”Vivarium 2,” control for experiment in hypergravity;
”hypergravity,” experimental animals in 2g centrifuge. Hematoxylin-eosin staining, 40>< magnification, 1 mm scale bar. Color
images available online at www.liebertonline.com/ast
observations (Masini et aL, 2012). The differences of the fol- a 5.45- and 17.66-fold increase in SMase and SM-synthase
licle surface area are shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1. activity, respectively, in comparison to the controls, while
Experiments of immunoblotting demonstrated that the hypergravity resulted in a 1.95 and 10.55 increase in SMase
long-term exposure to a real microgravity environment in- and SM-synthase (Fig. 5a). The hypogravity increased 5.45-
creased the levels of SMase and SM-synthase1 (Fig. 2a). The and 17.66-fold, whereas hypergravity resulted in a 1.95- and
band density of SMase, corresponding to 42 kDa apparent 10.55-fold increase in SMase and SM-synthase activity, re-
molecular weight, was 2.18-fold higher than that of the Vi- spectively, in comparison with their controls (Fig. 5a).
varium 1 control, whereas the hypergravity reduced the However, with regard to the enzyme activity in relation to
enzyme 1.79 fold with respect to the Vivarium 2 control (Fig. the band density, it was evident that the increase of SMase
2b). Immunoﬂuorescence analysis confirmed these data and activity was similar in hypogravity and hypergravity, and no
highlighted a different distribution of the enzyme with variation was found for SM-synthasel activity (Fig. 5b).
gravity change in comparison with control samples. In fact, The band of Bax, corresponding to 23 kDa apparent mo-
in Vivarium 1 and Vivarium 2 the enzyme appeared partic- lecular weight, showed a higher immunopositivity either in
ularly localized inside the cells, as specific round images, hypogravity or in hypergravity with respect to control ani-
whereas in hypogravity the enzyme had a more uniform mals (Fig. 6a). The band area density analysis demonstrated
distribution and the hypergravity sample showed a per- that the value was 2- and 4-fold higher than that observed in
ipherical localization (Fig. 3). The immunoblotting of SM- Vivarium 1 and Vivarium 2, respectively; by comparison, the
synthase1 showed a strong immunopositivity of band, values in hypogravity and hypergravity were very similar
corresponding to 49 kDa apparent molecular weight, only in (Fig. 6b).
the sample in hypogravity (Fig. 2a). The band area analysis
showed an enrichment of about 20-fold in hypogravity in 4. Discussion
comparison to Vivarium .1' whereas no variations were Although we were able to discern by way of FRTL-5
present in hypergrav1ty With respect to its control (Fig. 2b). , , ,
. . . thyr01d cells in culture the effect of the space env1ronment
These data were conﬁrmed With the immunoﬂuorescence , , ,
. . on the involvement of SM metabolism in the change of cell
technique (Fig. 4). , , ,
. function (Albi et aL, 2010), there have been no reports of this
To analyze whether the SMase and SM-synthase1 1n hy- , , , ,
. . . . . effect in thyr01d glands m vzvo. Our data show clearly that
pograv1ty and hypergrav1ty were active, the enzyme act1v1- , , , , ,
. . . 1n the control sample the SMase was localized spec1f1cally 1n
ties of both enzymes were assayed. Hypograv1ty resulted in , ,
the nucleus, whereas in hypograv1ty the enzyme moved
from the nucleus and was homogeneously distributed in the
T ABL E 1. SURFACE AREA OF THYR 01D F OLLI CL E 5 cells. Hypograyity induced an overexpression of both en-
— zymes With a diffuse localization of SMase. Apparently, the
Vivarium 1 14.9 i 57 activity of SM-synthase1 increased more than that of SMase,
Hypogravity 35.4i 1.9“ but considering the activity in relation to the enzyme con-
Vivarium 2 20-6i3-5 tent, only SMase activity increased. Therefore, only the
Hypergrav1ty 27-39i2-8 SMase of mouse thyroid was more active in hypogravity,
. which is similar to results obtained in vitro in FRTL-5 cells.
The surface area of large folllcles was analyzed by ImageFocus . . . . f h . ﬂ
software. Data represent the meaniSD of three analyses performed Thls r epr esents the ﬁrst anlmal observatlon O t e 1n uenC.e
in thyroid gland of three mice maintained in Vivarium and used as of welghtlessness on SM metabohsm. Out of the three aru-
Controls for 6Xperirnent in .hypogravity (Vivarium 1), 0f three mals sent to space inside the MDS on board the Shuttle
analyses performed 1n thyr01d gland of the mouse ma1nta1ned 1n Discovery and then transferred to the 133, only one returned
hypogravity, of three mice maintained in Vivarium and used as t E th 1. ft th 91-d . . U 11 h
controls for experiment in hypergravity (Vivarium 2), and of three 0 ar a we a er e. ay Space mISSIOn' sua y"" suc
mice maintained in hypergravity. Significance: MP < 0.001 hypograv- a low number Of experimental animals would be COHSldered
ity versus Vivarium 1. inadequate for conducting scientific analyses. But because

"
"4","4 ALBI ET AL.
3
SMase
ﬁvaﬁum 1 hypugravity Vivarium 2 hypergrauity
b 25001::-
20000
H I: SM 352
5? I 3M syriha 551
m 15MB
=
H
'U
'U
5 1am
I
5mg I I I
{J
ﬁvarium 1 twpngavily WariumE hypergavily
FIG. 2. Comparison of SMase and SM-synthasel content by immunoblotting analysis. The study was performed by using
specific antibodies. The position of the 43 kDa apparent molecular weight for SMase and 49 kDa for SM-synthasel is indicated
comparing the position of molecular size standards. The area density was evaluated by densitometry seaming and analyzed
with Scion Image program. Data represent the meaniSD of three analyses performed in the thyroid gland of three mice
maintained in Vivarium and used as controls for experiment in hypogravity (Vivarium 1), of three analyses performed in the
thyroid gland of the mouse maintained in hypogravity, of three mice maintained in Vivarium and used as controls for the
experiment in hypergravity (Vivarium 2), and of three mice maintained in hypergravity. Significance: MP < 0.001 hypogravity
versus Vivarium 1.
of the exceptionality of the experimental substrate (animals Changes in the thyroid cell membrane during spaceﬂight are
kept in space for the longest time, to date) and the im- due to weightlessness (Albi 615111., 2011), we conjectured that
probability that such an experiment will be repeated within the modifications of SM metabolism enzymes shown in this
a reasonable amount of time, we present the results as a case could be due to the hypogravity and were therefore
case report. Given that we recently demonstrated that the interested in a comparison of the results with those
SMEEE I I I I
3W” . . . . . .
'H'W'EII'ILIITH hypngramty wanum 2 hyrpmargrzmtj,»r
FIG. 3. Fluorescence immunostaining of SMase in thyroid tissues. Analyses were performed using anti-SMase primary
antibody and TRITC-Conjugated secondary antibody. 40Xmagnification, 3 mm scale bar. The arrows indicate particulars at
100Xmagnificati0n, 1 mm scale bar. (”Vivarium 1,” control for the hypogravity experiment; ”Vivarium 2,” control for the
hypergravity experiment.) Color images available online at www.liebertonline.C0m/ast

"
"5","THYROID SPHINGOMYELIN IN SPACE 5
SMEWhEEﬂ - - - -
3pm
marium‘I hypngrmity Wham 2 hypergraﬁty

FIG. 4. Fluorescence immunostaining of SM-synthasel in thyroid tissues. Analyses were performed by using anti-SM-
syntasel primary antibody and FITC-Conjugated secondary antibody. 20Xmagnification. Color images available online at
www.liebertonline.com / ast
obtained under hypergravity conditions. It would seem that modifications in cellular response and therefore signifi-
hypogravity and hypergravity would generate opposite cantly modifies thyroid function. It is interesting to note
results, but some key results of our study were surprisingly that, in analogy to SMase, the level of Bax is similar in
similar. In fact, the most relevant distinctions to be made hypogravity and hypergravity as well. Thus, as the associ-
are that in hypergravity no variation of expression of SMase ated behavior of the two proteins was previously observed
and SM-synthasel were found. The SMase translocated, when FRTL—5 thyroid cells entered into a pro-apoptotic
however, from the nucleus to the cytoplasm as occurs in state at the reentry of a space mission (Albi et (11., 2010), we
hypogravity; and its activity, calculated in relation to the speculate that the cross-talk between the two proteins was
band density of the enzyme, had similar values. This im- stimulated by the change of gravity. On the other hand,
plies that, although the SMase was present in thyroid with morphological analysis of thyroid follicles also revealed
different content in hypogravity and hypergravity, the large differences in comparison to the control samples but
change of gravity could be responsible for a molecular re- significant similarities between the hypogravity and hy-
modeling that could inﬂuence the cell fate. It is possible that pergravity conditions. This supports our hypothesis of the
the change of gravity induces functional proteins to trigger significant inﬂuence of gravity on the partitioning of

a 10000

I:

E T500 USMase

“a ISMsyntrasm ”

E

E

D- 5000 t.

:1

E

E
FIG. 5. Activity of SMase and SM-syn— E- 2500
thasel. The enzyme activity was evaluated as
(a) Cpm/mg protein/min; (b) Cpm/mg pro-
tein/min in relation to band density analyzed 0 — — I
three analyses of one experiment for the hy-
pogravity sample and of three analyses of b 35
three independent experiments for the other
samples. Significance: **P< 0.001 hypogravity DSMESE
versus llVivarium 1” (control 1) and ”hyper- 3 '14 Ismsmagm
gravity” versus llVivarium 2” (control 2). E

0.1

u DIS *‘ﬁ' 'I'I

1:

l:

N

a l

3;. 0-2

IE

‘0'

“I 0.1

n I ll
Vivarium '1 hypngrauity Vivarium 2 hypergraujty

"
"6","6 ALBI ET AL.
3
ha}:
‘ul'i'u'al'ile 1 hypugravityr Vivarium 2 hypergn-awrictyr
'3 1mm:
m0
3.""
E
1.: Eﬂlﬂ
'u
E
.D
23.""!
[I
Will“ 1 hypcgrmity- Min“ 2 typetgmity
FIG. 6. Comparison of Bax content by immunoblotting analysis. The study was performed by using a specific antibody. The
position of the 23 kDa apparent molecular weight was indicated in comparison to the position of molecular size standards.
The area density was evaluated by densitometry scanning and analyzed with Scion Image program. Data represent the
meaniSD of three analyses of one experiment for the hypogravity sample and of three analyses of three independent
experiments for the other samples. Significance: **P<0.001 hypogravity versus Vivarium 1. (”Vivarium 1,” control for the
hypogravity experiment; ”Vivarium 2,” control for the hypergravity experiment.)
relevant molecules within the cell membrane. Looking Abbreviations
ahead, the quest. W111 new be to understand the tnterplay FITC, ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate; 153, International Space
between the 11p1d env1ronment and protem act1V1t1es to .
. . . . . Statlon; MDS, Mouse Drawer System; PBS, phosphate-
1dent1fy poss1b1e countermeasures that are effectlve 1n pre— . . . .
. . . . . buffered salme; PC, phosphatldylchohne; SM, sphlngomye-
servmg the mtegrlty of the thyr01d structure and functlon. . . . . . .
1m, SMase, sphlngomyehnase, STS, Space Transport System,
TRITC, tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate; TSH, thyro-
Acknowledgments tropin; TSHR, TSH receptor.
This work has been partially supported by grants from
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana (ASI). References
Albi, E., Cataldi, S., Rossi, (3., Viola Magni, M., Teller, M., Ca-
Glossary sani, S., and Perrella, G. (2008) The nuclear ceramide/diac-
Apoptosis: process of programmed cell death. ylglycerol balance depends on the physiological state of
Bax: prO-apoptotic BC1-2 protein. thyroid .cells and. changes during UV-C radiation induced
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (CAMP): second messenger aPOPtOSIS' Areh Bzoehem Bzophys 47852—58
involved in signal transduction. AIEI’ E1: Ambesl-IIEplombiatg, 5,3111%, Mz'bllge Pﬁ’ 1"" 151p ela’ﬁ
Lipid raft: liquid-ordered microdomain, formed by sphin- "" azzantu, "" an erre a, ' ( ,) .yr01 ce
. . . . . . . . growth: sphmgomyelm metabohsm as non-mvaswe marker
gomyehn w1th a hlgh aff1n1ty for cholesterol, 1n a hquld- . . . .
. for cell damage acqulred durmg spaceﬂlght. Astrobzology
dlsordered phase of cell membrane. 10'811—820
Slzgnall transductzon: the p 1: OCESS by IWhiCh in eadracelluTar Albi, E., Ambesi-Impiombato, F.S., Peverini, M., Damaskopou—
m0 ecu e actlvates a mem rane mo ecu e, t at 1n turn 1n- lou, E., Fontanini, E., Lazzarini, R., Curcio, F., and Perrella,
duces a response by actlhg on 1ntrace11ulatmolecules. . . G. (2011) Thyrotropin receptor and membrane interactions
Sphmgomyelm metabolism: sphlngomyehn, a ma]or 11p1d in FRTL-5 thyroid cell strain in microgravity. Astrobiology
constituent of cell membranes, important in cell signaling, is 11:57—64.
degraded by sphingomyelinase and produced by Sphingo- Cancedda, R., Pignataro, 5., Alberici, (3., and Tenconi, C. (2002)
myelin-synthase. Mice Drawer System: phase c/d development and perspec-
Thyrotropin: or thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) re- ﬁve, ] Gravit Physiol 9:337—338.
leased by the anterior pituitary gland, located at the base of Edidin, M. (2003) The state of lipid rafts: from model membrane
the brain, that regulates the activity of the thyroid gland. to cells. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 32:257—283.

"
"7","THYROID SPHINGOMYELIN IN SPACE 7

Latif, R., Ando, T., Daniel, S., and Davies, T.F. (2003) Localiza- ronment on adult mammalian organisms: a study on mouse
tion and regulation of thyrotropin receptors within lipid rafts. thyroid and testis. PLOS One 7, e35418.

Endocrinology 144:4725—4728.

Latif, R., Ando, T., and Davies, T.F. (2007) Lipid rafts are triage Address correspondence to:
centers for multimeric and monomeric thyrotropin receptor Elisabetta Albi
regulation. Endocrinology 148:3164—3175. Laboratory of Nuclear Lipid BioPathology

Lowry, O.H., Rosebrough, N.]., Farr, AL, and Randall, R]. CRABiON
(1951) Protein measurement with folin phenol reagent. I Biol Via Ponchielli 8
Chem 193:265—275. 06073 Perugia

Masini, M.A., Albi, E., Barmo, C., Bonfiglio, T., Bruni, L., Canesi, Italy
L., Cataldi, S., Curcio, F., D’Amora, M., Ferri, 1., Goto, K.,

Kawano, F., Lazzarini, R., Loreti, E., Nakai, N., Ohira, T., E—mail: ealbiﬂlbp.51C.@Crabion.it
Ohira, Y., Palmero, S., Prato, P., Ricci, F., Scarabelli, L., Shi-

baguchi, T., Spelat, R., Strollo, F., and Ambesi-Impiombato, Submitted 14 March 2012
ES. (2012) The impact of long-term exposure to space enVi- Accepted 19 July 2012

"
