"","x"
"1","SPECIAL REPORT
It t. '5 Stt° Md. ISt dd d
C t'f' t' fpS FI'htP t"" t
VALERY V. BOGOMOLOV, FILIPPO CASTRUCCI,
JEAN-MARC COMTOIs, VOLKER DAMANN, JEFFREY R. DAVIS,
J. MICHAEL DUNCAN, SMITH L. JOHNSTON, GARY W. GRAY,
ANATOLY I. GRIGORIEV, YU KOIKE, PAUL KUKLINSKI,
VLADIMIR P. MATVEYEV, VALERY V. MORGUN,
VLADIMIR I. POCHUEV, ASHOT E. SARGSYAN,
KAZUHITO SHIMADA, ULRICH STRAUBE, SHOICHI TACHIBANA,
YURI V. VORONKOV, AND RICHARD S. WILLIAMS
BOGOMOLOV VV, CASTRIéCCI (F; COMES? JhM' DAMANIXV, DAVIS 11;, Common medical standards were among the essen-
DUNCAN JM, JOHNSTON L, RAY , RIGORIEV I, KOIKE , - - - - - -
KUKLINSKIRMATVEYEV VP, MORGUN VV, POCHUEV VLSARGSYAN AE, tlal requisltesfof a 10.1 nt Ihedlcaldsugport dsyséem for
SHIMADA K, STRAUBE U, TACHIBANA S, VORONKOV YV, WILLIAMS RS. 155' In June 0 .1998, ulterlm Hie lca Stan ar 5 Wére
International Space Station medical standards and certiﬁcation for adopted, enabling the ISS Multllateral Space Medlcme
spaceﬂight participants. Aviat Space Environ Med 2007;78:1162—9. Board (MSMB) t0 medically certify the future mem—
lritroductlon: The medical'commuimty of the International'Space bers Of long-duration crews. These standards were
Station (ISS) has developed Jomt medical standards and evaluation re- 1 d d b 'd . d. 1 'd
quirements for Space Flight Participants (”space tourists”) which are ater upgra e. y CODSl ermg new me lca eVl etme
used by the ISS medical certification board to determine medical eligi- aDd bESt praCthES, aDd DamEd ISS MEdlcal EValuathD
bility of individuals other than professional astronauts (cosmonauts) for Documents (MED) Besides, partners defined speciﬁc
short—du'ration space flight to the ISS. These mdnvnduial's' are general'ly requirements for the selection Of Space Flight Partici-
fare-paymg passengers Without operational responsibilities. Material t SFP * th R . S A b f
and Context: By means of this publication, the medical standards pah S ( )’ as e u551an pace gency .egan O _
and evaluation requirements for the ISS Space Flight Participants are fermg seats on SOYUZ VEhldes 0n 3 COHlHlerCla1 b3515-
offered to the aerospace medicine and commercial spaceflight commu- The first document of the series, ”Medical Standards
nities for reference purposes. It is emphasized that the eriteria appiied to and Certification Procedures for Space Flight Partici-
the ISS spaceflight partiCipant candidates are substantially less stringent t ,, d t d b “.1 t 1 . M
than those for professional astronauts and/or crewmembers of visiting pan 8’ was a QR e y mu 1 a .era fonsensus 1n ax
and long-duration missions to the ISS. Conclusions: These medical 2002/ aDd later glven the Short tltle MED VOhlme C
standards are released by the government space agencies to facilitate the (see Appendix). The document applies only to SFPS
development of robust medical screening and medical risk assessment (passengers without operational assignments) trans-
approaches in the context of the evolvmg commerCial human space-
flight i n du st ry ported to the ISS for short-term stays under 30 d, and
Keywords: space tourism, space medicine, commercial spaceflight, inCIUdeS mEdical eValuation reqUirementS and causes
medical certification, international cooperation. for rejection. The medical evaluation Of SFPS is de-
signed to identify candidates who are: assessed to be
at low risk for medical conditions that could require
l I NPRECEDENTED technologlcal C0mP1€X1ty and emergency medical treatment on-orbit or compromise
broad Internatlonal c00perat10n are among the mission Operations during ISS habitation; capable of
highllghts 0f the ISS program. The medlcal component carrying out an uncompromised emergency egress;
0f the program has evolved into an effective opera-
tional system through synergistic input from all part-
ners [the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European From the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the
United States (NASA); Canadian Space Agency (CSA); European
Spacé Agency (ESA)’ the Federal Space ,Agency Of Space Agency (BSA); Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA);
Russm (FSA), the Japan Aerospace Exploratlon Agency and the Russian Federal Space Agency (Roscosmos).
(JAXA), and the US. National Aeronautics and Space This manuscript was received for review in July 2007. It was ac-
Administration (NASA)]. Another development of CEPtEd for PUbhcatlon 1“ september 2007- ,
note in the dawn Of the 215t centur is the emer ence Address correspondence to: Ashot E. Sargsyan, Wyle Laboratories
. y . g Life Sciences Group, 1290 Hercules Ave, Ste 103, Houston, TX, 77058;
Of SpaCEﬂlght aS a broadly marketEd commeI‘CIal prOd- ashotsargsyan-l@nasa_gov
uct, The supporting position of the government space Reprint & Copyright © by Aerospace Medical Association, Alexan-
° ° II ° N dria, VA.
agekrliae:1 has Efrﬁuéted spacf2eht01urism01 . to Operate D 01: 10.3357/ASEM.2175.2007
Wlt Int e eSta 15 e SyStem O t e SS an 1tS transport * Space Flight, rather than spaceﬂight, is the term used for this
mfrastructure. specific program.
1162 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007

"
"2","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
free of physical deformities that would prohibit normal by consensus. To consider any waiver against the MED
use of ﬂi ht e ui ment; and ca able of artici atin in Vol. C standards, MSMB must receive a formal re uest
g Cl P P P P g Cl
an re uired reﬂi ht trainin or on-orbit actions that com lete with an evidence-based rationale; each waiver
Y Cl P g g P
might be required in an off-nominal situation. must be defended before the full complement of the
The medical evaluation process includes clinical ex- board. The board’s focus is to preserve and promote
amination, laboratory tests, and special physiological mission success in spite of a possible deviation from
test procedures to determine whether requirements standards, and assure the 155 program management ac-
have been met. These re uirements are substantiall cordin l . Therefore rationale must consider such fac-
Cl Y 3 Y
less stringent than those for career ISS crewmembers, tors as cause and stability of the condition, treatment, risl<
although still designed to minimize acute and long- of recurrence or manifestations during the ﬂight, and im-
term health-related risks to the SFP candidate and other pact on the condition from unique factors of spaceﬂight
crewmembers, and to maximize mission success. such as acceleration, environmental factors, and medical
Through this publication, the medical organization of care availability on the 155. Resolution mechanisms are
the 155 Program is releasing the ISS SFP standards for available when consensus cannot be reached, including
reference purposes, expecting interest among the aero- an opportunity to resubmit the case after additional eval-
space medical community and the commercial space nation or evidence-based risk analysis.
industry.
CONCLUSIONS
MATERIAL AND CONTEXT The evaluation requirements and certification criteria
Risk assessment considers both probability of an event published m the artiele were developed Jomtly by 30V""
and its consequences. The probability of a medical event ernrnent space .388“ch Of. the. 1.55 Program £01: the pur-
is determined from a detailed clinical assessment, re- pose Of determining the ellglblhty Of SFP candidates Ofor
View of available literature, and clinical specialist opin- short-duration space hlght (less than 30 d) m the specific
ion. A medical event may affect overall mission safety setting of the ISS and its transport infrastructure. SFPs ini-
and outcome, in addition to causing acute or chronic t1ally undergoOmedical scrutiny by the certiﬁcation board
health consequences for the individual. The type or role Of the sponsoring agency, and only then by the ISS MSMB
of the crewmember is an important determinant of mis- The authors emphasize that SFPS carry no operational
sion impact. responsibilities and have full access to the 155 medical
The MED standards were developed by the Medical snpport system. Therefore, MED Volume C standards
Standards and Health Evaluation Working Group of differ signiﬁcantly from those established for crewmem-
the ISS Multilateral Medical Operations Panel. MED bers Of 155 expeditions and Vlslhhg professional crews,
Volume C applies only to short- durati on (less than and would not be suitable for their medical certiﬁcation.
30 01) Visitors without operational duties and assignments The, MSMB typically hears medical “Sh analysis Opre-
(SFPs) arriving at the 185 on existing transport vehi- sentations to consider the probability of disease manifes-
cles (Soyuz or space shuttle). The SFPs are exposed to tations against the maSmFUdE’ Of rnedicalOconsqunenees
a predictable environment and well-studie d ﬂight and impact on the m1ss1on. Available r1sl<O mitigation
profiles during all phases of the Visiting missions. measures in all mission phases are also taken into account
Since they are not expected to operate the transport in the ﬁnal certiflcationOdec1sions. By May of 2007, the
vehicle or critical ISS systems, temporary degradation MSMB had considered eight SFP candidates. Ah coneerns
in their subjective well-being, physical fitness, or were resolveol Whhlh the MSMB through additional
operational performance would not have a serious medical examinations and clinical deliberations w1th r1sl<
impact on the mission. Furthermore, well-established analysis. Five SFPS cornpleted the” training and were
pre- and in-ﬂight medical monitoring and care capabil- ﬂown to the 15$ for m1ss1ons that lasted from 10 to 13 d.
ity is available for the SFPs, including trained crew By meansOof th1s pnblication, the medical standards
medical officers supported by an international ground and evaluation reqnirements for SFPS Oare offereol to
infrastructure. the aerospace med1c1ne and commerc1al spaceﬂight
The MSMB is a group comprised of five physician communities for reference purposes, to facilitate the
members (one from each 155 partner agency) with quali- development Of medical screening approaches and
fications and involvement in aerospace medicine and “Sk. assessment OmethodologyO m the context Of Othe
medical certification activities at their respective agen- rapidly developing commerc1al human spaceﬂight
Cies. The MSMB has the final authority for determining industry.
medical certification of every lSS-bound individual, in-
cluding SFPs, and is not subject to any administrative ACKNOWLEDGMENTS , ,
ressures Each artner selects and certifies their 10D _ The authors are grateful for past contrlbutlons to the develop-
P O ' O O P O g ment of SFP medical standards to Drs. Sam Pool (NASA, ret.), Craig
duration or V1s1t1ng crewmembers through thelr agen- Fisher (NASA, ret.), Chiharu Sekiguchi (JAXA, ret.), Tadashi Murai
cy’s medical board, and then submits the medical data EJSAXAC), Vlﬁdimir Niﬁugﬂ (StarhCity, Rulsgial, tea; and Yﬁm Klatgev
- - - - _ tar ity, ussia,ret.. eaut ors wou a so i e to ac now e ge
fer l‘eVIGW and approval by the MSMB' In Its Certiﬁca the organizational assistance of Ms. MaGee Johnson and Ms. Cheryl
hon process, the MSMB CODSlStenﬂY fOHOWS pr1nc1ples Armstrong, and the outstanding administrative support of Ms. Kae
of full disclosure of medical data and decision making Parker.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007 1163

"
"3","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. MEDICAL EVALUATION PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS.+§
SECTION III: MEDICAL EVALUATION PROCEDURES FOR SELECTION AND RECERTIFICATION*
3.1 MEDICAL HISTORY
May be completed using the NASA Medical Survey or other similar questionnaire used by ISS Partner agencies. The following areas will be covered
in detail:
1. Past medical history and background information
2. Family history
3. Psychosocial and psychiatric history including DWI and drug-related convictions
4. Personal habits/lifestyle issues
5. Travel history (past year)
6. Medication review, including nonprescription and herbal medications, food supplements, vitamins and minerals
7. Systems review
8. Physical activities and sports
3.2. COMPLETE PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
3.3 LABORATORY TESTS
1. Complete blood count, PT, PTT
2. Biochemical screen [Urea, creatinine, uric acid, AST, ALT, GGT, ALP, bilirubin, TSH, total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides,
HS-CRP, electrolytes (Na, K, Cl), calcium, magnesium, inorganic phosphate, fasting blood glucose, prostate specific antigen (males over
age 40)]
3. Syphilis screen —VDRL, RPR, or equivalent
4. HIV screen
5. Drug screen
6. Hepatitis A, B, C screen for exposure and immunity
7. Fecal occult blood (x 3)
8. Urinalysis
3.4 ANCILLARY TESTS
1. Tuberculin skin test
2. Chest X-ray (PA and lateral)*
3. Abdominal ultrasound*
4. Audiometry
5. Vision testing (uncorrected and corrected visual acuity, refractive error, tonometry, fundoscopy, visual fields, color vision)
6. Pelvic ultrasound (females)*
7. Pregnancy test (initial, recertification, and L-10)
8. Microbiology — nasal, throat, stool cultures
9. H. pylori screen (breath test or antibody)
3.5 CARDIOPULMONARY EVALUATION
1 . Exercise stress test (assess maximum oxygen uptake, arrhythmia screen, screen for coronary heart disease)
2. Pulmonary function screen (expiratory flow rates, lung volumes, diffusion capacity)
3. Echocardiography / color Doppler study*
4. Coronary calcium score (males > 40, females > 50)
5. Carotid ultrasound (age 50 and over)
3.6 PSYCHIATRIC/PSYCHOLOGICAL EVALUATION
1. Psychiatric interview
2. Psychological testing
3.7 SOYUZ SPECIAL TESTING
1 . Centrifuge testing
2. Hypobaric Chamber testing
3. Vestibular testing
SECTION IV: MEDICAL STANDARDS: CAUSES FOR REJECTION
4.1. GENERAL
1. In general, any medical condition that, in the judgment of the MSMBi, may compromise mission operations or crew safety, or require urgent
medical treatment while resident on the ISS
2. Any acute or Chronic infection or communicable disease until healed and not associated with functional deficit or communicable state
3. Any injury, contusion, fracture, or surgery until healed and not associated with functional deficit
4. History of heat stroke associated with significant sequelae, or history of low heat tolerance
5. History of hypersensitivity or demonstrated allergy of sufficient severity so as to interfere with the mission
6. Vestibular 0r orientation problems of such chronicity or severity so as to interfere with the mission
7. Chronic use of any medication may be considered disqualifying (each case will be reviewed by the MSMB)
8. History 0f or presence of any pathological growth (tumor) (each case will be reviewed by the MSMB)
9. Any foreign body unless verified not to be a hazard during all mission activities
10. Clinical or laboratory evidence of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection orAcquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), 0r of chronic
infection with Hepatitis B or C viruses
11. Failure to satisfy anthropometric criteria, including height and weight, which should be compatible with Shuttle and Soyuz human factors
Continued
1164 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007

"
"4","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. CONTINUED.
4.2. HEAD, FACE, AND NECK
1. Deformities 0f the skull/head, face, and neck that cause functional impairment or interfere with wearing of personal equipment or headgear
2. Chronic or persistent contraction of neck muscles sufficient to interfere with the wearing of protective equipment
3. Chronic draining 0f fistulae 0f the neck, regardless of cause
4.3. NOSE, SINUSES, MOUTH, AND THROAT
1. Deformities, tumors, injuries, or destructive diseases of the mouth, nose, throat, pharynx, 0r larynx that interfere with breathing, speech,
or mastication and swallowing of ordinary food or wearing of personal equipment
2. Marked stomatitis, leukoplakia, 0r ulcerations 0f the mouth
3. Salivary 0r tracheal fistula
4. Perforation, 0r extensive loss of substance of the hard or soft palate; extensive adhesions 0f the soft palate t0 the pharynx; or complete paralysis
of the soft palate
5. Adenoid or soft tissue hypertrophy that interferes with breathing or is associated with recurrent otitis media
6. Any disorder or defect that impairs the Clarity of speech sufficient to interfere with verbal communication, or interferes with
swallowing
7. Any surgical procedure involving the nose, sinuses, mouth, or throat until recovery is complete and the structures are again functionally
normal
8. History or evidence of recurrent epistaxis unless a benign lesion is identified and eradicated
9. Any Chronic disorder or defect that interferes with the normal ventilation of paranasal sinuses
10. Malformation, injury or disease of the esophagus such as ulceration, diverticulum, varices, stricture, achalasia 0r pronounced dilation
4.4 DENTAL
1. Any dental defect interfering with speech or causing Changes in the contours of the face, which interferes with nominal mission activities or
emergency procedures
2. Diseases 0r abnormalities of the jaws or associated structures including periodontal disease, that are not easily remedied or may interfere with
nominal mission activities or emergency procedures
3. Severe malocclusion that interferes with the mastication of a normal diet or Clear enunciation
4. Any dental defect such as dentinal caries, dentinal dysplasia, enamel dysplasia, symptomatic cracked teeth, defective restorations, defective
prosthesis, and defective implants until corrected
5. Partially erupted, impacted third molar teeth with the potential to cause erosion of adjacent teeth, pericoronitis, 0r periodontal defect until
corrected
6. Infections of endodontic 0r periodontic origin until resolved
4.5 EARS
1. Any disease or deformity of the ear or mastoid with auditory 0r vestibular impariment, such that emergency egress or successful completion
of the mission may be compromised
2. Auditory impairment interfering with speech discrimination
3. Symptomatic Chronic external otitis
4. Chronic mastoiditis 0r mastoid fistula
5. Acute or chronic otitis media, suppurative 0r serous
6. History or presence of abnormal labyrinthine function, including Meniere’s disease
7. History of attacks of vertigo, with or without other symptoms
8. Tinnitus that interferes with hearing and communication
9. Any Chronic disorder or defect that interferes with ventilation of the middle ear
4.6 EYES
1. Disease of eyes, lids and supporting structures that may interfere with emergency egress, the use of personal equipment, or that may compro-
mise mission effectiveness
2. Lids and ocular adnexae
a. Destruction of the lids sufficient to impair protection of the eye from exposure
b. Bilateral ptosis that interferes with vision
c. Inversion 0r eversion 0f the eyelids
d. Dacryocystitis, acute or Chronic
3. Cornea
a. Keratitis, acute or Chronic if a manifestation of systemic disease
b. Recurrent corneal ulcers including herpetic ulcers
c. Inflammation of the uveal tract (iris, Ciliary body, choroid)
d. Refractive surgical procedures, if free of complications, will be considered on a case-by-Case basis if visual standards are met
4. Retina
a. History of detachment of the retina unless of traumatic origin
b. Degeneration of the retina - hereditary or acquired, unless stable
C. Retinitis or other inflammatory conditions of the retina unless healed and not interfering with vision
d. Chorioretinitis unless healed and not interfering with vision
e. Refractive error greater than —6.0 diopters associated with retinal lattice degeneration
5. Optic Nerve
a. Active optic neuritis 0r neuroretinitis.
6. Other Defects and Disorders
a. Nystagmus except compensated congenital forms.
b. Diplopia.
C. Any organic or congenital disorder of the eye or adnexa not previously specified that threatens to impair visual function.
Continued
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007 1165

"
"5","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. CONTINUED.
7. Inability to meet the following visual acuity and refraction standards.
a. Distant visual acuity: correctable to 20/40 in better eye.
b. Near visual acuity: correctable to 20/40 or better in better eye.
8. Paralysis or weakness of ocular motion that may interfere with emergency egress or the use of personal equipment.
9. Glaucoma (as defined by pressure above 30 mmHg or secondary Changes in the optic disk or visual field).
4.7 LUNGS AND CHEST
1. Active pulmonary tuberculosis, or a history of active pulmonary tuberculosis unless therapy was completed more than 2 yr previously
2. Documented conversion of the tuberculin test, or a positive tuberculin skin test in the past 60 mo before examination (unless treated with an-
tituberculous drugs for at least 6 mo, with completion of treatment at least1 yr before examination); individuals vaccinated with BCG will be
evaluated on a case-by-Case basis
3. History of spontaneous pneumothorax unless corrected surgically and free of complications; if not corrected surgically, a 4-yr period free of
recurrence or complications is required
4. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with evidence of disturbance of pulmonary function of sufficient severity so as to cause functional im-
pairment or increased risk for pulmonary barotrauma
5. Any condition of lungs and Chest that could result in a sudden medical emergency or interfere with successful mission completion
6. Active asthma: any history of asthma will require a full respirology assessment and will be considered on an individual basis by the MSMB
7. Pulmonary bullae or cysts will be evaluated on a case-by-Case basis
8. Abscess of the lung
9. Symptomatic Chronic adhesive pleuritis
10. History of intrathoracic surgery until recovery is complete as indicated by normal pulmonary function studies and Clinical absence of residual
disability
11. Any malignant tumor of the breast or Chest wall
12. Suppurative periostitis, osteomyelitis, or necrosis of the ribs, sternum, clavicle, scapulae, or vertebrae
13. Congenital malformation, tumor, or acquired deformity that diminishes respiratory or cardiac functions to a degree that interferes with vigor-
ous physical exertion or wearing of equipment or protective clothing
14. History of pulmonary embolus, except for well-documented amniotic fluid or post-traumatic fat embolism
4.8 CARDIOVASCULAR
1. Any cardiovascular condition which in the judgment of the MSMB may compromise mission operations or the health or safety of the SFP
2. Pathologic hypertrophy or dilation of the heart
3. Elevated blood pressure (measured in the recumbent position) evidenced by preponderant systolic pressure of 140 mmHg or greater and/or
preponderant diastolic pressures of more than 90 mmHg, regardless of age; Blood pressure may be treated by diet or certain pharmacological
measures if approved by the MSMB
4. Symptomatic hypotension
a. A history of recurrent syncope will require further review
5. Pericarditis, myocarditis, or endocarditis
a. A history of these conditions without residual dysfunction is considered on a case-by-Case basis.
6. History or findings of major congenital abnormalities of the heart and vessels; uncomplicated dextrocardia and other minor asymptomatic ab-
normalities may be acceptable.
7. Any evidence of coronary heart disease, treated or untreated (medically or surgically), is potentially disqualifying and will require review by the
MSMB
8. History or evidence of cardiac arrhythmia, conduction defect (or other electrocardiographic abnormality) will require review by the MSMB
and is potentially disqualifying.
a. Need for a pacemaker or implantable defibrillator is disqualifying
9. History of recurrent thrombophlebitis or thrombophlebitis with persistent thrombus, evidence of Circulatory obstruction, or deep venous
incompetence
10. Varicose veins if associated with edema or skin ulceration
11. Peripheral vascular disease
12. Cardiac tumors of any type
a. Benign cardiac tumors successfully resected without residual cardiac disease are reviewed on a case-by-Case basis.
13. Valvular disorders of the heart associated with hemodynamic anomalies
4.9 HEMATOLOG Y
1. Significant red cell, white cell, or platelet disorders of any cause
2. Disorders of hemostasis
a. Personal history of bleeding disorder requires further evaluation for disposition on a case-by-Case basis
b. Hemophilia is disqualifying
3. Hemolytic disorder, other than those of a self—limited nature or due to a drug reaction
4. Significant deviation from the laboratory standards is potentially disqualifying and may require additional testing to evaluate any underlying
pathological Changes.
5. Splenic disorders:
a. Palpable spleen or spenomegaly requires further evaluation for disposition on a case-by-Case basis
b. Hyposplenism or post-splenectomy state requires further evaluation for disposition on a case-by-Case basis
6. History of recurrent thrombosis, arterial or venous
7. Coagulation disorders predisposing to recurrent thrombosis
8. Other hematologic or reticuloendothelial disorders that could interfere with the performance of duties
4. 10 ABDOMEN AND DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
1. Chronic diseases or disorders of the alimentary tract are possibly disqualifying and will require evaluation by the MSMB
2. Wounds, injuries, scars, or weakness of the muscles of the abdominal wall sufficient to interfere with function
Continued
1166 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007

"
"6","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. CONTINUED.

3. Abdominal wall hernias other than small asymptomatic umbilical until surgically corrected
a. A relaxed inguinal ring or a diastasis recti without herniation is not disqualifying
b. Any other herniations of clinical significance will be considered on a case-by-Case basis.

4. Sinus or fistula of the abdominal wall; properly functioning ostomies will be evaluated on a case-by-Case basis

5. History or diagnosis of ulcer of the stomach or duodenum until asymptomatic and documented as healed and free of H. pylori.

6. Malignant or symptomatic tumor of any part of the gastrointestinal system unless removed and resulting in no postoperative dysfunction.

7. History of intestinal obstruction if due to any Chronic or recurrent disease. Surgery to relieve Childhood pyloric stenosis, intussusception, or
volvulus is not disqualifying if there are no sequelae

8. History of, or recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding may be disqualifying and will require evaluation by the MSMB.

9. Hepatitis within the preceding one year or persistence of symptoms or presence of laboratory evidence of Chronic hepatitis

10. Any chronic or major progressive liver, gallbladder, or pancreatic disorder
11. History of cholecystectomy if there are postoperative signs or symptoms indicative of residual dysfunction, such as postoperative stricture of
the common bile duct, reforming of stones in the ducts, or incisional hernia
12. Vascular mesenteric insufficiency
13. Colostomy, unless one year from the date of surgery has passed and functional capability is demonstrated
14. Acute or Chronic diseases of the rectum or anus; external or internal hemorrhoids that cause marked symptoms or bleeding
15. Inflammatory bowel disease or malabsorption syndromes
4. 1 1 ENDOCRINEAND METABOLIC

1. Any endocrine disease or disorder that may affect performance of duties

2. Diseases of the thyroid, parathyroid gland, adrenal gland, hypothalamus, pituitary gland, or gonads are potentially disqualifying and will
require evaluation by the MSMB

3. Metabolic disorders
a. Diabetes mellitus requiring therapy other than diet will require evaluation by the MSMB
b. Gout
C. Pseudogout
d. Renal tubular dysfunction

4. Any other metabolic / endocrinological disorders that require supportive or replacement therapy are potentially disqualifying and will require
evaluation by the MSMB

4.12 GENITOURINARY

1. Disease, injury, or other disorders of the kidneys or GU tract that could require emergency medical treatment or interfere with successful mis-
sion completion

2. Acute or Chronic nephropathies

3. Autoimmune parenchymal and vascular renal disorders and other renal vascular disease

4. Primary or secondary neoplastic disorders of the urinary tract

5. History of recurrent urolithiasis or presence of urinary tract calculus; a single episode of urolithiasis with normal metabolic and imaging
studies will be assessed by the MSMB

6. Evidence of prostatic hypertrophy or other prostatic disease interfering with micturition and potentially requiring emergency medical
treatment

7. Any disabling disorders of the reproductive system or associated anatomical structures that could potentially require emergency medical
care

4.13 MUSCULOSKELETAI.

1. Any major amputation or malformation will require evaluation by the MSMB and may be disqualifying. In addition, Flight Crew Operations
may require demonstration of ability for certain conditions such as emergency egress, donning of protective equipment, and responding as di-
rected in an off—nominal situation. Inability to demonstrate proficiency may be disqualifying.

2. Active infection or malignant tumor of any bone, joint, or other supporting structure.

a. Any other disease, foreign body, or injury of any bone, joint, or supporting structure that interferes with emergency egress or may compro-
mise response in an off-nominal situation

3. Unreduced dislocation or instability of a joint

4. Ununited or malunited fracture that interferes with emergency egress or the use of personal equipment

5. Any fracture in which a plate, pin, or screw was used for fixation if the fixation device remains in place and is easily subject to trauma

6. Myopathies and other muscular paralysis, paresis, contracture, and atrophy if progressive and/or of sufficient degree to interfere with response
in an off-nominal situation

7. Recurrent dislocation, instability, or marked restriction of the range of motion of any joint that would interfere with emergency egress or
impede response to an off-nominal situation

8. Disease or abnormal curvature of the spine that may interfere with emergency egress or the use of personal equipment

9. Significant lack of dexterity and loss of grip or strength of fingers and hands that could interfere with emergency egress or required response
in an off-nominal situation

10. Chronic arthritis if severe enough to interfere with emergency egress or use of personal equipment
11. Ankylosis and chronic or recurrent bursitis, tendonitis, and synovitis sufficient to interfere with required function
12. Osteoporosis or significant loss of bone mineral density that in the opinion of the MSMB may predispose the individual to increased risk of
fracture
4.14 SKIN

1. Adherent scars that interfere with the wearing of personal equipment or that impair movement to the extent that emergency egress would be
impeded

2. Infections of the skin, systemic or superficial, if communicable, extensive, or not amenable to treatment

3. Any skin disorder, acute or Chronic, that is severe enough to cause interference with emergency egress, wearing of flight equipment, or
successful mission completion

Continued
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007 1167

"
"7","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. CONTINUED.
4.15 NEUROLOGICAI.
1. Disorders of the peripheral and central nervous systems that could interfere with emergency egress or, if progressive or recurring would cause
such interference or result in a sudden medical or surgical emergency
2. Vascular disorders of the nervous system (e.g. Arteriovenous malformation, intracranial aneurysms, Moya-Moya disease) are disqualifying
3. Primary or secondary neoplastic disorders of the central nervous system
4. Infections of the central nervous system within two years before examination or residual neurologic defects that would interfere with
performance of duties
5. Congenital or developmental abnormalities of the nervous system significant enough to interfere with performance of duties
6. History of traumatic brain injury associated with any of the following:
a. Any loss of consciousness or amnesia requires further evaluation.
b. Intracerebral hemorrhage.
C. Penetrating injuries or laceration of the brain.
d. Skull fractures are reviewed on a case-by-Case basis.
e. Imaging evidence of retained intracranial metallic or bony fragments
f. Absence of bony substance of skull
g. Parenchymal central nervous system injury with persisting neurologic deficits
h. Cerebral leptomeningeal cysts, aerocele, brain abscess, traumatic CNS infections, or arteriovenous fistula
i. Transient rhinorrhea or otorrhea is reviewed on a case-by-Case basis.
j. Any post—traumatic syndrome manifested by Changes in personality, deterioration of higher intellectual functions, anxiety, headaches, or
disturbances of equilibrium for more than 3 mo is disqualifying, and for less than 3 mo may be disqualifying
7. Vascular, migrainous, or Cluster headache of sufficient severity or frequency to interfere with normal function or that might pose a risk to the
mission; frequent or severe headaches due to other causes also are disqualifying.
8. Seizures
a. History of seizure disorders, including absence (petit mal).
b. Febrile convulsions before the age of 5 years or seizure Clearly attributable to toxic etiology (e.g. organic solvent poisoning, oxygen toxic-
ity) are not disqualifying
C. Benign age-related seizures (e.g. Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy) are evaluated on a case-by-Case basis
9. Evidence of disease of the brain, spinal cord, cranial or cervical nerves that would interfere with emergency egress or use of personal life sup-
port equipment
10. History of a cerebrovascular accident (stroke, transient ischemic attack, subarachnoid hemorrhage). Asymptomatic disease of the carotid or
vertebral arteries is evaluated on a case-by-Case basis.
11. Other neurological/movement disorders
a. Movement disorders such as Tourette’s syndrome, dystonia and Chorea
b. Parkinson’s disease and related conditions
C. Essential tremor will be assessed on a case-by-Case basis
4.16 PSYCHIATRICAND BEHAVIORAL
The diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder shall meet the criteria established in the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSML International Classification of Disease (ICDL and International Classification of Disease (ICD) for Implementation in
Russia
1. Any behavior or mental condition that, in the opinion of the MSMB, makes or is likely to make the individual a hazard to flight safety, crew
coordination, or mission execution is disqualifying
2. The following conditions including a history of the condition are disqualifying:
a. Psychotic Disorder (or history of)
b. Bipolar Disorder (or history of)
C. Dissociative Disorder (or history of)
d. Impulse Control (or history of)
e. Somatoform Disorder (or history of)
f. Factitious Disorder (or history of)
g. Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (or history of)
h. Paraphilia (or history of)
i. Abuse or Neglect of a Child or Adult (or history of)
j. Disorders Usually First Diagnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence that interfere with social or occupational functioning or that re-
quire ongoing treatment
k. Narcolepsy (or history of)
l. Personality Disorder (an inflexible, maladaptive, and enduring pattern of personal interaction that has been present since early adulthood)
(or history of)
m. Adjustment Disorder (or history of) that may interfere with the performance of duties
n. Depressive Disorder
i. History of Depressive Disorder will require further evaluation by the MSMB
0. Anxiety Disorder
i. History of Anxiety Disorder will require further evaluation by the MSMB.
p. Eating Disorder.
i. History of Eating Disorder will require further evaluation by the MSMB
q. Gender Identity Disorder (or history of)
r. Substance Abuse or Dependence
i. History of Substance Abuse or Dependence will require further evaluation by the MSMB (Nicotine-related Disorders are not necessarily
disqualifying)
s. Delirium, Dementia, Amnesia, Other Cognitive Disorder, or Mental Disorder Due to General Medical Condition, or History of these, if
there is a likelihood of recurrence or evidence of residual deficits of cognition, memory, judgment, insight, or behavior
t. V—Code Conditions that may interfere with the performance of duties
Continued
1168 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007

"
"8","SPACEFLIGHT MEDICAL STANDARDS—BOGOMOLOV ET AL.
APPENDIX. CONTINUED.
u. Sleep Disorders that may interfere with the performance of duties
v. Psychological Factors Affecting Medical Condition
w. Characterological behaviors that show evidence of immaturity, instability, impulsiveness, lack of judgment, or an impaired capacity to
adapt to stressful situation
4.17 OBSTETRICS AND GYNECOLOGY
1. Any disabling disorder of the genitourinary system or associated anatomical structures that interferes with performance of duties
2. Any acute or Chronic disorder of the uterus and/or adnexa that may interfere with the performance of duties (e.g., endometriosis)
a. History of any Chronic disorder of the uterus and/or adnexa that are adequately managed will require evaluation on a case-by-Case basis
3. Dysmenorrhea and other irregularities of the menstrual cycle such as premenstrual syndrome that interfere with performance of duties
4. Infection
a. Chronic or recurrent infections and inflammation of the endopelvic organs
b. History of a single episode of pelvic inflammatory disease will be evaluated on a case-by-Case basis
5. History of malignancy 0f the genitourinary tract
a. Carcinoma in situ 0f the cervix is reviewed on a case-by-Case basis
6. History of recurrent, abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia unless definitively treated
7. History of recurrent symptomatic ovarian cysts or history of recurrent corpora hemorrhagica unless definitively resolved
8. Any menstrual abnormality caused by polycystic ovarian conditions, anovulation, 0r disorders of the hypothalamiC-pituitary-ovarian axis re-
quires further investigation and shall be evaluated on a case-by-Case basis.
9. Pregnancy is disqualifying until full post-partum recovery
Jr From Medical Evaluation Document (MED) Volume C: Medical Standards and Certification Procedures for Space Flight Participants. International
Space Station Program, Rev. 1.0, May 2007.
§This is an abridged version of MED Vol. C. The entire Appendix can be viewed in the online version (http://www.asma.0rg/journal/online_journal.php).
* Items required for selection but not recertification indicated by an asterisk.
* MSMB = Multilateral Space Medicine Board.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 78, N0. 12 - December 2007 1169

"
