"","x"
"1","RESEARCH ARTICLE
M sc loskeletal In' r'es and M'nor Tra ma 'n
O J O O O
0
Space. InCIdence and In Jury Mechanisms In
US. Astronauts
RICHARD A. SCHEURING, CHARLES H. MATHERS,
JEFFREY A. JONES, AND MARY L. WEAR
SCHEURIIZG RA, MATHERS CH, JONES 11:1» WEAR 1:141» Musculoskeletal found astronauts sustained numerous fractures, serious
in 'uries an minor trauma ins ace:inci ence an in 'ur mec anisms - - - - - - - -
inJLI.S. astronauts. Aviat SpacfEnViron Med 2009; 810:117—24. llgament,.cart11a.ge, 01‘ 80ft tlssue 1n].ur1es,.result1ng In 28
Introduction: Astronauts have sustained musculoskeletal injuries and 01‘th0pedlc surglcal procedures durmg thls. perlod. Knee
minor trauma in space, but our knowledge of these injuries is based lnjurles aCCOUDtEd for 19 Of the surglcal 1ntervent10ns,
mainly 0“ anecdotal reports- The IOWIOOS?3 {31 9W StUdY W35 to catalog while running, skiing, and basketball were the activities
and analyze all m-fllght musculoskeletal Injuries occurring throughout most frequently associated With injuries. The authors
the U.S. space program to date. Methods: A database on m-fllght mus- d d h h. . f f 11 . 1 .
culoskeletal injuries among U.S. astronauts was generated from records recommen .e t .e lung 0. .11 'tlme P?ISODa tralners
at the Johnson Space Center. Results: A total of219 in-flight musculoskeletal aDd the dESIgnatIOD Of a fac111ty for trammg purposes at
injuries were identified, 198 occurring in men and 21 in women. lnCi— Johnson Space Center, both of which are now in place as
dence over the course of the space program was 0.021 per flight day for manifested in the Astronaut Strength Conditioning and
men and 0.015 for women. Hand injuries represented the most common R h b'l't t. ASCR ' . d B ' .
location of injuries, with abrasions and small lacerations representing e a 1.1 a ton ( ) program. Jennlngs an aglan
common manifestations of these injuries. Crew activity in the spacecraft recognlzed the Importance Of understandmg the mECha'
Cabin such as translating between modules, aerobic and resistive exer— nism of injury or trauma, noting that it was ”time to
else, and injuries caused by the extravehicular aetiyity (EVA) sulit compo- move beyond documentation Of injuries and treatment
nentsweretheleadingcausesofmusculoskeletal Injuries. ExerCIse-related t .d. th t t . t t 't'
injuries accounted for an incidence of 0.003 per day and exercise is the O prOV1. 111g a program} .a IS, HVEOES .0 preven 01‘ m1 .1-
most frequent source of injuries in astronauts living aboard the Interna- gate trammg-related 1nlurles- Thls 1mP0rtant study 15
tional Space Station (ISS). Interaction with EVA suit 90mp9nents aC— often cited in discussions regarding musculoskeletal in-
Icoiun'ted for an mcndence of 0.26 Injuries per EVA. Discqssmn: Hand juries and prevention in astronauts, but did not address
Injuries were among the most common events occurring m U.S. astro— . -ﬂ' ht
nauts during spaceflight. Identifying the incidence and mechanism of in- In 1g 9ccurrOenceS'. . .
flight injuries will allow flight surgeons to quantify the amount of medical An arthle Pﬂnted 1“ the LongltUdlnal Study Of AStrO'
supplies needed in the design of next-generation spacecraft. Engineers naut Health (LSAH) newsletter in December 1999 exam-
componen s. _ _
Keywords: astronaut, NASA, strain, sprain, abrasion, contusion, laceration, between ShUttle Transport SyStem (STS) 1 and. STS 89
dislocation, EVA, injury. (12). The authors found an overall greater 1n-ﬂ1ght
injury rate among astronauts than comparison partici-
pants in the LSAH. Interestingly, they also found a
AS A ASTRON AUTS fa c e a variety of occupational threefold hlgher 1n]ury rate w1th1n astronautts’ mlssmn
hazards throughout their career. In addition to the pEI'lOd, deflnegl as; Y1"" preﬂlght t0 1371‘ Tpﬁstﬂghtaversus
risks inherent to space travel, astronauts perform physi- t. e rate 011:1 e t ehmlisahoh P8110 ' 15 1315.: qlées-
cally demanding tasks in unfamiliar environments. tlorhs a; to ,O,W muc ﬁt) It 1s1ncr§ase Wdas “”5,th , t0
Coupled with bone and muscle mass loss due to the ef- pre 1%.titlra1n1ng, post If; tmjury ue t0 e-con 1t10n1ng,
fects of microgravity 0n the human body, one could hy- 01111; 1:16:51 tmlfllry' , , , , d , h
pothesize that astronauts may be at increased risk for ﬂe h OW t at astrohaﬁts gustam 1n].u1:1es urtng t.e
sustaining musculoskeletal injuries while conducting pre 1g t perlo ' espec1a y urmg trammg sessmns 1n
space Operations. Indeed, anecdotal reports from astro-
naUtS and pOStﬂight miSSiOD dEbl‘iEfings in all NASA From NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX; The University
spaceﬂight programs support this theory, as many astro- of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX; and Wyle Laboratories,
nauts have noted in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries. H0u§t0nl TX- , , , ,
H t1 t1 d t d. f th . Thls manuscrlpt was recelved for rev1ew 1n January 2008. It was
. OWEVEI‘, un 1 rece?‘ y’ Pur un ers an 111g 0 eseOID- accepted for publication in November 2008.
Jurles was based prlmarlly 0n anecdotal reports, Wlth- Address reprint requests to: Richard A. Scheuring, 13.0., M.S., NASA
out evidence—based data to support these claims. Johnson Space Center, SD4, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX 77058;
- - - - richard.a.scheuring@nasa.gov.
Jennlngs.and Baglan CODdUlCtéd. a St11dy exammmg Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association,
the terrestrlal-based orthopedlc 1n]ury hlstory 0f astro- Alexandria, VA.
nauts during the period of 1987 to 1995 (5). The authors DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.2270.2009
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009 117

"
"2","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL). Viegas et al. contusions, and lacerations. We did not include other
identified 83 astronauts who participated in training at forms of non-musculoskeletal trauma such as foreign
the NBL between July 19, 2002, and July 18, 2003 (11). body in the eye or burn injuries such as scalding a hand
Out of the 83 astronauts, 28 experienced hand symp- while preparing food or contacting high-temperature
toms, 19 experienced shoulder symptoms, while 9 had surfaces. However, trauma-associated dermatologic con-
problems with the elbow. The authors also mention that ditions like abrasions and lacerations were included be-
NBL training sessions occur right up to an astronaut’s cause these conditions not only affect the underlying
assigned launch date, 1’resulting in persistence of these musculoskeletal structure associated with them, but
injuries into the space ﬂight and EVA.” It seems likely represent important injuries in terms of suit and space-
that injuries seen both in ﬂight and postﬂight may be the craft design.
result of exacerbations of old training injuries rather Many entries in the pain category were particularly
than new injuries associated with the mission. However, difficult to define. Astronauts often mentioned pain in a
up to now training injuries and the relationship to in- particular area of their body without a clear mechanism
ﬂight events have not been clearly identified. The pur- elucidated. Because a clear mechanism for these condi-
pose of the current study was to construct a descriptive tions could not be ascertained, they were excluded from
and comprehensive database of in-ﬂight musculoskele- reporting in the study. Cases of back pain related to space
tal injuries in the US. space program, enabling analysis adaptation syndrome, a very common in-ﬂight problem
and classification of these injuries. To the degree to which among astronauts which has been attributed to the spi-
documentation allowed, injuries were examined to de- nal elongation that occurs in microgravity (4,6,14), was
termine mechanism and causality, treatment rendered, excluded from our search. In addition, in-ﬂight muscu-
and relevant postﬂight outcome effects. losl<eletal injuries were excluded if they reﬂected an
acute exacerbation of a pre-existing preﬂight condition.
METHODS

Data on musculoskeletal injuries was obtained from RESULTS
postﬂight medical debriefs, the LSAH medical record da- A total of 369 in-ﬂight musculoskeletal conditions
tabase, the Johnson Space Center (JSC) electronic medical were found, from which 219 in-ﬂight musculoskeletal
record system, including ASCR specialist assessment and injuries were identified, along with a detailed mecha-
treatment logs, and the JSC Flight Medicine Clinic vault nism for each injury. There were 198 injuries in male as-
records. The study was exempted from the NASA-JSC tronauts and 21 injuries among female crewmembers.
committee for the protection of human subjects approval Exercise, previous injury, treatment, and postﬂight out-
on the basis of anonymity of the data and the fact no crew- come data were included if found within the postﬂight
members were actually directly involved in the study. medical debriefs or in-ﬂight 155 private medical confer-
Paper copies of ﬂight medical records for the Mercury ences. U.S. astronauts have operated in space a total of
program and Gemini 111 through IX were used. Postﬂight 231,724.7 h as of December 2006, with 198,275.5 of those
medical debriefs were available for Gemini X through XII hours by male crewmembers and 33,449.4 by female
and the Apollo program through the Apollo/Soyuz Test crewmembers. Calculating the precise rate of crewmem-
Project. For the shuttle program, data was abstracted from ber injury incidence proved challenging. NASA crew
the LSAH and cross-referenced with data from the post- scheduling constraints documents (1—3,7,8) limit crew
ﬂight medical debriefs. Data on STS-90 through 113 was days to no more than 16hof awal<e time per day. However,
found in the postﬂight medical debriefs only, while injury astronauts frequently work longer days, with launch,
data from the NASA/Mir program was extracted primar- landing, and EVA being notable exceptions to these con-
ily from the LSAH. Musculoskeletal injury data in the straints. Due to the complexity and variability of astro-
International Space Station (155) program was extracted naut schedule and actual work time per day over the
from the private medical conferences held between the course of multiple ﬂight programs, all the calculations
ISS crewmembers and their ﬂight surgeon up to and in- reported are per 24 h (1 d) on orbit.
cluding Expedition 13, as well as from the ASCR special- Therefore, the incidence of in-ﬂight musculoskeletal
ists supervising the crewmember’s in-ﬂight training injuries was found to be to 0.021 injuries per day for
regimen. Lastly, several entries came directly from per- male crewmembers and 0.015 injuries per day for female
sonal communications with astronaut crewmembers or crewmembers. Fig. 1 represents the total injuries sepa-
ﬂight surgeons and the authors when not otherwise du- rated by anatomical location. Hand injuries dominate
plicated. Information collected on each injury included throughout the space program, with shoulder and back
location, type, and a detailed narrative on the mechanism injuries also notable in the data. The general category
of injury, the type of exercise the crewmember performed included injuries to multiple locations, such as multiple
during the ﬂight, previous history of injury, treatment, abrasions to the arms and shins, or injuries in which a
and postﬂight outcome. The term ”in-ﬂight” also refers to definite location could not be ascertained from the
events that occurred on the lunar surface. mission debriefs.

The purpose of our study was to examine in-ﬂight Fig. 2 breaks down the injuries by type, with abrasions
musculoskeletal injuries and minor trauma specifically and contusions representing the most prevalent, fol-
related to the musculoskeletal system, such as abrasions, lowed by strains. Fortunately, in-ﬂight cases of significant
118 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009

"
"3","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
:0 80
.2 7o
.2. 60
f 50
o 40
S 10
Z 0
~z~°°be°$$é <<°°k “‘6‘ V°g~z~°°bé°$+°°0 oéi<°§$§é ®Qe‘6&<<’°°°¢§é
6‘9 0° Q
Fig. 1. ln-flight musculoskeletal injuries throughout
Location Of Injuries the US. space program by location.
soft tissue injury such as sprains and dislocations have ing EVA activities, and the fourth a hand abrasion
been uncommon. To date there have also been no cases immediately following the EVA. EVA-related injury in-
of in-ﬂight skeletal fractures. cidence from all sources was 0.05 per hour in 1087.8 h of
Fig. 3 illustrates totalinjuries in the space program by EVA activity during the space program to date. This
mission actiVity. Injuries while transferring equipment equates to an in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injury incidence
accounted for the majority observed. The exercise cate- of 1.21 per day or 0.26 per EVA.
gory included injuries caused by exercise equipment Use of the aerobic and / or resistive exercise equip-
or exercise activity. The launch and entry suit (LES) ment accounted for 12 of the 14 musculoskeletal injuries
category included injuries caused by the older LES or occurring on the 155. The treadmill with Vibration and
the new advanced crew escape suit (ACES) or during isolation system was associated with two injuries, the
launch and entry operations while wearing the suit. The interim resistive exercise device accounted for seven
experiment category involved injuries occurring during injuries, while use of both devices was blamed for the
scientific experiments and the egress category included remaining three injuries. Calculating incidence for exer-
injuries sustained while exiting the spacecraft. cise-related injuries was also challenging because time
Abreakdown of the specific types of crew activity that spent exercising has varied throughout the space pro-
caused in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries is illustrated in gram. Therefore, we calculated incidence based on a
Fig. 4. Generic crew activities were the leading category 24-h day. Through the entire space program, exercise ac-
of injury, although a large number of those injury etiolo- tiVity or use of exercise equipment was associated with
gies are unknown. Impacting structures, especially while an injury rate of 0.003 injuries per day. We found only
stowing hardware and translating through the vehicle, one in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injury among female as-
was a leading cause of injury. Wearing the extravehicu- tronauts due to exercise, which involved a strained bacl<
lar actiVity (EVA) suit and performance of exercise were muscle due to use of a resistive exercise device. Two
the second and third leading causes of in-ﬂight injuries, other musculoskeletal conditions were identified in
respectively. Cases listed as unknown in Fig. 4 represent women due to exercise: one in which a pre-existing os-
injuries in which l’crew activity” was the identified teoarthritis of the knee was felt to have been a predis-
mechanism, but no further information was available. posing factor and the other was an aggravation of an
Further examination of the 50 injuries that occurred underlying lateral epicondylitis. Since these cases invol-
due to the EVA suit is depicted in Fig. 5. In this analysis, ved pre-existing conditions, we did not include them as
the hand represented the most commonly injured area new injury events in the data. Of note, another condition
of the body during EVA, followed by the foot. Five other involving aggravation of underlying knee osteoarthritis
injuries occurred during EVA that were not due to inter- due to exercise in a male crewmember was also ex-
action with the suit components (see Fig. 3). Four of cluded. There were no injuries reported with the use of
these injuries involved muscular strains while perform- either the US. or Russian exercise cycle ergometer.
g 80
:3
E 50
“c2 40
2 o
{$00 @é‘oo 956'?“ «$00 9690 (F&OO
‘0 0 Q! 0
V‘ 0° V00 04'}
Fig. 2. ln-flight musculoskeletal injuries throughout
Injury Type the US. space program by type.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009 119

"
"4","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.

33

g. 70

_ 60

“E §§

é t8

5 0

«$6 9§ (’5‘? o‘90 (3’9 06‘ <94? «09%
v59 4?. 49‘ 6‘9 99‘ 066‘ 9°""
‘04; Q! «I 0 \3’ 6‘9
(1 Fig. 3. ln-flight musculoskeletal injuries throughout the
Mission ActiVity US. space program by mission activity.

Table I shows the anatomical location of injuries due ring and sleeve repetitively rubbed over the joint was
to exercise and also separates injuries based on which reported. One event resulted in a significant shoulder
NASA spaceﬂight vehicle the crew occupied. Notewor- strain during a surface core drilling experiment on the
thy in this table are a substantial number of back injuries second of three EVA. Lastly, one report of significant
occurring on 155. Table II summarizes the different muscle fatigue occurred in the lower extremities while
types of in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries by mission ac- covering large distances on the lunar surface or ambu-
tiVity taking place at the time of injury. Soft tissue inju- lating up sloped terrain.
ries in the form of abrasions and contusions dominate
the injury log, with the notable exception of strains that DISCUSSION
occurred mainly during crew translation and exercise. Overview data on in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries in
Table III illustrates the injury incidence separated by the US. space program is illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2.
specific NASA spaceﬂight program. The rates in general However, the real power of the in-ﬂight musculoskeletal
are quite low, with the highest rate per ﬂight hour occur- database is evident when analyzing specific scenarios
ring early in spaceﬂight history. leading to these injuries. As illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4,

Finally, nine musculoskeletal events or minor trauma crew activity caused most of the injuries in ﬂight, of
related to EVA occurred on the lunar surface. Five events which stowing equipment, translating through, and im-
occurred in the hand, ranging from finger soreness and pacting structures within the spacecraft cabin resulted
muscle fatigue (attributed to the high workload and in the most injuries. This might be of interest to space
constraints of working in a pressurized glove) to pain, vehicle design engineers as the interiors of spacecraft
swelling, and abrasions over the metacarpophalangeal such as Skylab and 155 allow for more freedom of move-
(MCP) joints and distal phalanx. In the wrist, a lacera- ment. For example, one astronaut suffered a left infra-
tion occurred due to the suit wrist ring cutting into the orbital contusion after hitting the galley oven door
skin. Extensor wrist pain and soreness where the suit on the space shuttle, while another 158 crewmember

Shaving _
Dressing _
Using scissors _
Waiting on launchpad _
Clipping nails _
Reaching while seated _
Eating =
g Handling checklist =
Q Donning suit -—
E: Restraint -_
U Transferring equipment -—_
Abnormalpositioning L
Repairing equipment g
Tra nslating through spacecraft =___=_
Stowing equipment E
Impacting Strucmres “A
Unknown 22+
° 2 4 6 8 1° ‘2 ‘4 ‘6 ‘8 mifs'ﬁmi'skié‘t’ffiEJ-fufifswthiéﬂéiféﬂﬁi'”5.5233;
Number of injuries program.
120 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009

"
"5","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
.8 25
i 20
f 15
o
g 10
E 5
3
Z 0
$006 Q00""» 0&be.‘ $6‘ {‘83} V09 9°C? $66}. [606* 000‘»
6° 0 Fig. 5. Location of in-flight musculoskeletal injuries
Location of Injuries throughout the US. space program due to the EVA suit.
pinched their finger between two racks of equipment. among EVA crewmembers, often due to the increased
Several astronauts described foot pain due to foot re- force needed to move pressurized, stiff gloves or repeti-
straints used to anchor themselves in microgravity, both tive motion for task completion. Many astronauts de-
intravehicular activity and EVA. scribed the gloves causing small blisters and pain across
Other crewmembers have attributed their finger and their MCP joints. This could be due to dorsal displace-
wrist injuries to catching the extremity in a foot or hand ment of the MCP joints against the glove in order to ﬂex
hold on the vehicle wall while translating through the the fingers (11). While not of mission impact, these
cabin. The one joint dislocation that occurred in space types of injuries could potentially distract an astronaut
occurred by this mechanism. Many other astronauts de- from important EVA tasks. As indicated by Viegas
scribed small abrasions on their hands caused by actiV- et al., astronauts frequently develop onycholysis after
ities such as donning suits, stowing equipment, opening NBL training sessions (11). When possible, we specifi-
lockers, transferring provisions and equipment, and cally documented evidence of pre-existing conditions
other activities requiring high manual dexterity. Several in our search for in-ﬂight injuries and feel that the ma-
astronauts also reported minor lacerations from paper jority of the injuries captured in this study occurred
cuts due to handling checklists. Viegas et al. noted that only in ﬂight. However, the postﬂight mission debriefs
in the microgravity environment, astronauts must use did not always document pre-existing conditions or
their arms and hands to accelerate or decelerate them- preﬂight injury, and it is possible some of these injuries
selves or stabilize their bodies in the vehicle or spacesuit represent exacerbations of underlying ground-based
(11). Crewmembers’ upper extremities essentially be- injuries (see Fig. 6).
come their legs. This could contribute to the high num- Foot injuries also caused problems for EVA astronauts.
ber of hand injuries observed in ﬂight. One astronaut described an episode of ”excruciating,
Of interest, most astronauts also remarked that searing, knife-like pain” during an EVA. The astronaut
their wounds healed more slowly while on orbit, an attributed the pain to excess suit pressure bladder mate-
important albeit anecdotal observation for spaceﬂight rial inside the boot, but despite attempts at correcting
immune-response researchers. This information may be the problem, the pain persisted with the development of
useful not only to engineers trying to improve existing a blister and decreased sensation to the dorsal aspect of
hardware, but also to astronauts by realizing the impor- the left foot. Though the EVA was completed success-
tance of proper hand protection while in ﬂight and fully, the astronaut described the pain from this injury as
of taking care when traversing through the spacecraft llon the forefront of my mind,” and considered classifying
cabin. the incident as a llmishap incident” or ”close-call.” An-
EVA places astronauts in situations of high physical other astronaut had similar symptoms after his second
demand, and tests the capability of equipment as it EVA with resultant numbness and pain on the dorsum
does the men and women performing the activity. We of his feet. Fig. 7 shows the bladder pressure associated
found that a relatively large number of injuries oc- erythema on the dorsal surfaces of each foot. In each
curred during EVA throughout the space program. As case the symptoms persisted throughout their mission
shown in Fig. 5, hand injuries were most common and as long as 2-3 wl< post-landing. Interestingly, other
TABLE I. LOCATION OF INJURIES DUETO EXERCISE ACTIVITY OR USE OF EXERCISE EQUIPMENT DURING EACH OF THE
NASA SPACEFLIGHT PROGRAMS.
Arm Back Foot General Head Hip Knee Leg Shoulder Incidence
Gemini 1 0.012
Shuttle 1 2 1 1 1 1 5 4 0.003
NASA/Mir 1 0.001
ISS 9 2 1 0.005
lSS—lnternational Space Station.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009 121

"
"6","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
TABLE II. TYPES OF IN-FLIGHT MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURIES OR MINORTRAUMA BY MISSION ACTIVITY.
Crew Activity Egress EVA Activity EVA Suit Exercise Experiment LES Unknown Total
Abrasion 34 1 1 21 3 1O 7O
Contusion 12 23 1O 6 12 4 67
Laceration 17 2 2 1 2 4 28
Sprain 1 3 4
Strain 17 4 2 17 6 3 49
Dislocation 1 1
Total 82 3 5 48 34 6 2O 21
astronauts experienced similar pain during NBL train- using the interim resistive exercise device. Two crewmem-
ing, which was attributed to a boot sizing insert or wear- bers, however, injured their hip from a poorly fitting tread-
ing thick socks. Obviously injuries such as these have mill system harness. Interestingly, there had been five
the potential to cause mission impact. separate incidences of similar injuries on shuttle missions
We found that many Apollo crewmembers who per- involving a treadmill harness. In addition, a treadmill har-
formed EVA on the Moon noted problems with their ness on the Mir brol<e while in use, causing the astronaut
hands. For example, one astronaut remarked, ”EVA 1 to impact a panel on the device, causing bruising and
was Clearly the hardest. . .particularly in the hands. Our swelling over the right shoulder and clavicle. An analysis
fingers were very sore.” Another commented that his of the mechanism of these injuries was used to improve
hands were l’Very sore after each EVA.” One Apollo as- the redesign of the subject loading devices, but it would be
tronaut even suffered a significant laceration to his wrist beneficial to use an evaluation of the forces placed on as-
during lunar EVA while working with drilling equip- tronauts’ bodies by previous exercise devices and acces-
ment. Another Apollo astronaut injured his shoulder as sories so that the potential for injury caused by future
a result of the tight mission timeline for completing mul- exercise equipment can be greatly reduced or eliminated.
tiple surface activities, and unbeknownst to his ﬂight Although beyond the scope of this review, there have
surgeon, tool< large doses of aspirin to treat the pain also been numerous anecdotal reports of musculoskele-
over the course of the next 24 h. In another instance, an tal and EVA-associated injuries and minor trauma in the
Apollo lunar crewmember stated that following the Russian space program prior to joint missions with
third lunar EVA, his metacarpophalangeal and proximal NASA, with the majority being associated with opera-
interphalangeal joints were so swollen and abraded tions of onboard equipment, but also associated with
from a poor-fitting glove and / or lack of inner liner or off-nominal landings in the Soyuz capsule. From Table
comfort glove, he is certain further EVA would have 11, one can observe the types of injuries most frequently
been very difficult if not impossible. This data is useful associated with particular U.S. mission activities. For
to suit engineers as they not only seek to improve exist- example, many astronauts reported contusions while
ing EVA suits but also design next-generation suits for wearing the LES or ACES. Throughout the space pro-
missions to the Moon and Mars. gram, astronauts complained that long periods of wait-
In examining the types of mission activity associated ing on the launch pad led to the development of pressure
with musculoskeletal injuries on 155, we found that even points from the LES or ACES. One astronaut even des-
though the overall incidence of in-ﬂight musculoskeletal cribed a new neck ring constricting circulation and caus-
injuries due to exercise was low, a relatively high number ing lightheadedness. Another case of neck ring-induced
of minor back injuries occurred while using the exercise difficulty occurred during a Soyuz landing rollover,
equipment. Table I shows the large number of back inju- resulting in crewmembers lying upside-down, sus-
ries that have occurred on 155 relative to other NASA pro- pended by their restraining straps.
grams. Most of these injuries involved muscle strains while Several injuries occurred while astronauts performed
scientific experiments. Two astronauts experienced con-
tusions due to a blood pressure cuff and hose, while
TABLE I”. IN-FLIGHT MUSCULOSKELETAL INJURY RATE AND Other astronauts SUffered CODtUSlODS to their ShOUlderS
FLIGHT HOURS PER NASA SPACEFLIGHT PROGRAM. after performing repetitive tasks in a glove box. The
: three egress injuries occurred only during the Mercury
Program Total Flight Hours '""C'dence Program and involved an abrasion to the leg and two
Mercury 5 59 3_00 5 lacerations t0 the hand.
Gemini 1939-7 0-049 Finally, Table III compares total ﬂight hours and inci-
élfﬁlalg 1 27:3? 7 8'82)? dence for in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries in crewmem-
AsyTP ’652:4 0' bers across the US. spaceﬂight program. The table
STS 129,946.5 0.033 demonstrates a decreasing rate of injuries, presumably
NAS/VM” 22/693-4 0-004 due to increased preventative medicine practices and
'55 56’580'9 0'008 improvements in the engineering design of the vehicle
ASTP—Apollo/Soyuz Test Project; STS—Space Transportation System; and SUit' This data also raises several queStiODS regard-
lSS—lnternational Space Station. ing the types and locations Of injury in relation to the
122 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009

"
"7","IN—FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
,_ 4;""..- V ‘1; , ' ‘ _ t
a 7* - 4.37"".-
11 ‘3 . Z '. .'~""' '

,‘."" :3; a ti ‘ 0 . ,
'.—‘;f§$«7 49:. 1 .. y _ . ‘.I__ t- “ I 3'"" 'l’,_ [I {
35:5 g ' L -‘ "" #41
3'5 ‘3 t ’7: ' ‘ «l c 133;; i I‘ ~ .1 A - * f 5.:- ,.- -

f +1 .g-‘x ‘ :2; ,N” g 3-1?” 93;; - . '1»; ; ,‘ ~
3.21 k 3.: ‘s .g, :- 5? Y » <1, -‘ _ é. 1312.!"" x: -'
apt» ..- 3-. ﬁe."" 8.? - -_ - 3:: § , x” ”(1‘3 \ . ‘ Jkﬁ"" 'i .‘ 1“,.-
‘ n ' 3'“ “' t‘ x"". . ‘ 1 : - \- . '13:??? ""‘-'-'~"",«z‘:'
%u_- _‘ » -. “i“ L x: ‘.\=: \7\""2 :\\-\ ‘3 i. l +1131. ' V
Fig. 6. Injury to nail bed leading to subsequent onycholysis (photo F 21% €?; ' .
courtesy of Dr. Sam Strauss and Dr. Jeffrey Jones). _ ""7. 54% ' 5:533"" ‘ “1,!

. "" E35719: a . 'I Q ..
mission phases between the various programs, e.g., ' ' 1 ""115.94 ‘ Eff: ' 1’ '3 jl
dynamic versus non-dynamic phases, vehicle configu- ' ’- E; :71; ti 1 , , ‘
ration, and launch and entry loads. Mercury entry loads . .r' ‘ 51‘ - ' ‘ .{gﬁ'
were among the highest of the different programs, but it .11 ""j A, ""' ‘ . .513; ."" ._.' 5';
is currently unknown what injuries occurred, if any, F' . .. H . I ‘ '

. . . . lg. 7. Injury to the dorsal aspect of feet followmg EVA (photo cour-
during this m1ss1on phase. tesy Dr. Joseph Dervay).

A number of prior studies have attempted to examine
injury rates in one near-analogue population—U.S.
Navy submariners. Wilken compiled a database of med- one medical event would occur during a 6-mo mission,
ical events aboard Polariz submarines between 1963 and and result in 3/4 (:1 or less of limited or no duty.
1967 (13). A total of 99 orthopedic injuries occurred dur- A number of limitations in the study exist. Though the
ing this period, with back, ankle, and knee sprains ac- database contains detailed information on mechanism
counting for the most injuries. Fractures of metacarpal of injury, the postﬂight mission debriefs did not always
bones and internal derangement of the knee were also discuss the other parameters examined, such as exercise,
frequent injuries noted. Tansey et al. reviewed data from treatment, and postﬂight outcome. Thus, the database is
Polariz submarine patrols during 1963 to 1973 (9). incomplete as many entries lack information in these ar-
Trauma was the second leading cause of injury aboard eas. A future refinement would involve referencing the
these submarines (004 new cases/ 1000 man—days) and astronaut’s electronic medical record to fill in the missing
accounted for the highest rate of days lost from duty information. Forward work could include pre- and post-
(0.16 d lost/1000 man-days). When compared to sailors mission data as well as training injuries to create a truly
aboard surface vessels, the injury rate was lower, but the comprehensive database on musculoskeletal injuries in
rate of days lost from duty was higher. the space program. Another possible weakness of this

Thomas et al. examined rates of medical events on US. study is the manner in which the source data was col-
Navy submarines between 1997 and 2000 (10). Among lected. Information about musculoskeletal problems was
officers, injuries such as open wounds and musculoskel- not always elicited from ﬂight crews, and the manner in
etal conditions such as disorders of ligaments, tendons, which it was collected changed over the course of the
and muscles accounted for the second and third most space program. In addition, certain entries needed refin-
Common medical events, respectively. Among enlistees, ing as to the accuracy of the diagnosis. These issues made
injuries accounted for the highest rate of events. The au- ensuring accuracy of the in-ﬂight musculoskeletal inju-
thors specifically compared the submarine environment ries a very difficult and time-consuming process. Of
to those encountered by astronauts, noting similarities in course, many musculoskeletal injuries may not have been
llisolation,closed environmentwith artificial atmosphere, reported in the first place. Because of these difficulties,
working and living in crowded quarters, limited space we anticipate that some in-ﬂight injuries may not be pres-
for medical supplies, non-physician health care provid- ent in this dataset. Another limitation is the impact or po-
ers, pre-mission health screening, and the precedence of tential impact to the crew workday from an occupational
the mission over individual needs.” Differences vs. astro- health perspective. Although mission success per se has
nauts include: crewmember education, communication for the most part not been compromised from in-ﬂight
outside the vehicle, and a lack of microgravity. Overall, injuries, it is unknown how many crew work hours have
they found limited potential for mission impact. Using been lost due to injuries occurring in space. Despite these
their data, assuming a crew of seven Naval officers, only limitations, this study represents the most comprehensive
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine ° Vol. 80, N0. 2 ° February 2009 123

"
"8","IN-FLIGHT INJURIES—SCHEURING ET AL.
reporting of in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries, to the best along with input from the ﬂight medicine community, to
of space medical knowledge, and represents a significant design evidence-based research studies. As NASA looks
improvement in cataloguing of these injuries. toward exploration missions to the Moon and Mars, eVi-
Though no in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injury to date has dence-based data on in-ﬂight musculoskeletal injuries
caused a failure of mission Objectives, the reports of the will be critical in helping astronauts achieve their mis-
Apollo EVA crewmembers and other astronauts listed in sion safely and effectively.
our investigation suggest their injuries could impact the
mission given the right circumstances, such as extended ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
duration Operations. Of note, preﬂight musculoskeletal The authors W91ﬂd,hke t0 ‘T‘CknOWIEdge the followmg mdl‘ndu'
. . . h It d in m im a t t 1 mm d mi _ als for the1r contrlbutlon to thlS pl‘OJECt and relevant data: Baby M.
irquries. ave resu e 50 e P C S O P a e . S Djojoneoro,]ennifer Fogarty, Sam Strauss, David Gillis, Steven Viegas,
s10n act1V1t1es. In-ﬂight problems such as back pain re- Michael Barratt, Scott Parazynski, Yamil Garcia, Jocelyn Murray, Tami
lated to Off-loading 0f the axial skeleton in microgravity Mlllcaheijfadleyl the Exploration MEdical Capability Project; the
or fingertip injuries due to stiff gloves 0r suit compliance EVA Physmlogy SyStemS and Performance Protect and the Natlonal
, , , , S ace Blomedlcal Research Instltute.
P
COUld be mltlgated 01‘ Prevented W1th Propel“ adJUSt' Authors and afﬁliations:Richard A. Schering,D.O.,M.S., and JeffreyA.
ments 01‘ countermeasures, and 0111‘ study provides Jones, M.D., M.S., NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX; Charles
. . . . . TX; and Mary L. Wear, Ph.D., Wyle Laboratorles, Houston, TX.
thropometric data obtained from 1n-su1t analysis has
shed light on injury patterns related to the EVA suit.
The information obtained in this study can be used to REFERENCES
- - - - - - 1. Generic ground rules, requirements & constraints (GGRnC), space
In I' mm D 1 n
.gke ECO e da’; 0 SdtO firevent Innings 1n ﬂhgh; and station program document # 50621-01. Houston, TX: NASA
a1 int e creation 0 me 1ca equipmeht, Its, an c eck- Johnson Space Center; April 2006
lists for the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and 111- 2. Ground rules, requirements & constraints (GRnC), SSP Document
nar surface vehicles. Based on the high number of hand f95gg621'02-H0ust0n/ TX: NASA JOhnSOH Space Center22711ﬂy
mlurles Observed during crew aCtIVIty’ ﬂlght surgesﬂls 3. 188 gerieric operational ﬂight rules, volume, B, NSTS-12820.
can emphas1ze hand protection to astronauts during Houston, TX: N AS A Johnson Space Center; 171413112007
spaceﬂight. Using the incidence of particular musculosk- 4. Hutchinson K], Watenpaugh DE, Murthy G, Convertino VA,
eletal injuries throughout the space program, ﬂight sur- Hargen? AR- BaCk Pal,“ durmg 6 degrees ,head'qown “1t
1 t. t th n mb 1‘ f m d1 t. d approx1mates that durmg actual m1crograv1ty. AV1at Space
geons can a s0.es 1ma e e u e e e ea ions an. Environ Med 1995,. 66:256—9.
medical supplies ant1c1pated for a given m1ss10n. Thls 5. Jennings RT, Bagian JP. Musculoskeletal injury review in the US.
will aid engineers by providing objective information on Space Program AViat Space EnVimn MEd 19962 67762—6-
h OW man su 11 es Will be H e e d e d in the S a C e craft and 6. Kershner D, Binhammer R. Intrathecal ligaments and nerve root
, y pp, , , P , , ’ tension: possible sources of lumbar pain during spaceﬂight.
helping to quantify weight requirements. In addition, en- Aviat Space Environ Med 2004,. 75:354—8.
gineers designing the next-generation Of spacecraft and 7. Shuttle crew scheduling constraints document. NSTS-37326,
EVA suits at NASA can use the database itself to examine Remeve‘i 23 April 2007 from http:/ /m0d-jSC-na5a-gOV/d04/
the mechanism behind these musculoskeletal in'uries ﬂightplan/faO/'
. J 8. Space Shuttle operational ﬂight rules, volume A. NSTS-12820.
and desagn countermeasures to help prevent them. Houston, TX: NASA Johnson Space Center; November 2006: 16.
Follow-Qn research will include evaluation of post- 9. Tansey WA, Wilson JM, Schaefer KE. Analysis of health data from
ﬂight injuries. In light of a recent femoral neck fracture i873ééji: (giggﬁflssﬁgmfgarme patmls' Undersea Blome‘i Res
in a long-duration crewmember pOStﬂight the riSk Of 10 Thomas TL Garland FC h/IoiéD Cohen BA Gudewicz TM S '

. . . . . ’ ' I I I I I PHO
pOStﬂlght 1n]ur1es W111 not only tell us about the effec- RT, Zahm SH. Health of US. Navy submarine crews during
tiveness of in-ﬂight countermeasures, but also give some . P91” iOdS 0? i§01at10ﬂ AViat Space EnViron MEd 2093; 743260—5-
insight, after a long interplanetary ﬂight with reduced 11‘ Vlegas S.E.thhams D’Jones Jﬁtraus? S’Clarkl‘PhyStcaldemands

, , , and mjurles to the upper extremlty assoc1ated W1th the space
graV1ty, into the musculoskeletal risk of surface opera- program J Hand 5ng [Am] 2004;29:359_66.
tions on Mars. The in-ﬂight musculoskeletal database 12. Wear M. Injury rate of shuttle astronauts. The Longitudinal Study
also provides the foundation for directing operationally oof AstronautoHeatth Newsletter, Decerriber 1999,- 8(2):1, 4. .
1 t h . d. . Th h h 13. Wllken DD Slgmficant med1cal experlences aboard Polarls
re evan researc In space me 1C1ne' e uman researc submarines: a review of 360 patrols during the period 1963-
program and the EVA PhYSIOIOgy SYStemS aDd PerfOI“ 1967. Groton, CT.: Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, US. Navy
mance Project at N AS A—Johnson Space Center have the Submarine Medical Center, Submarine Base; 1969. Report
- - - - - - _ number 560.
iéspi)n81bll,lt,y Of ddll‘eCtlng reseaﬂdll efforts for Intiave 14. Wing PC, Tsang IK, Susack L, Gagnon F, Gagnon R, Potts IE. Back
lcu ar aC’FIVlty an EVA,respect1\Ie Y' .ReseaOrCherS rom pain and spinal changes in microgravity. Orthop Clin North
these pI'OJECtS may use information in this database, Am 1991,- 22:255—6.
124 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 80, N0. 2 - February 2009

"
