"","x"
"1","wab Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _____________
Eﬂﬁ
(«5‘1 ‘9"" S ' D' t mm
saw! Clence Irec
“"" IBWMJMWFHM
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775 m
www.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
New molecular technologies against 1nfeetlous diseases during
space ﬂight
Luchino Y. Cohena’ *, Marcia Vernonb, Michel G. BergeronC
aCanadian Space Agency, Space Sciences, 6767, route de l’Aéroport, Saint-Hubert, Qué, Canada J3Y 8Y9
bInstitut National d’Optique, 2740, rue Einstein, Quebec City, Que., Canada G] T 1P4
CCem‘re de Recherche en Infectiologie, Université Laval, 2705, boulevard Laurie}: RC-709, Québec, Qué, Canada G] V 4G2
Received 20 July 2007; received in revised form 17 December 2007; accepted 29 December 2007
Available online 21 February 2008
Abstract
Latent Virus reactivation, reduction in the number of immune cells, decreased cell activation and increased sensitiVity of
astronauts to infections following their return on Earth demonstrate that the immune system is less efﬁcient during space ﬂight.
This dysfunction during long-term missions could result in the appearance of opportunistic infections or a decrease in the
immuno-surveillance mechanisms that eradicate cancer cells. On the other hand, monitoring of the microbial environment is
essential to prevent infectious diseases in space. Therefore, both aspects will have to be monitored continuously during long-term
missions in space, using miniature and semi-automated diagnostic systems. In the short term, such equipment will allow the
study of the causes of space-related immunodeﬁciency, developing countermeasures to maintain an optimal immune function
and improving our capacity to prevent infectious diseases during space missions. In order to achieve these objectives, a new
diagnostic system has been designed to perform a set of biological and immunological assays on board spacecrafts. Through
ﬂow cytometric assays and molecular biology analyses, this diagnostic system will improve medical surveillance of astronauts
and will be used to test countermeasures aimed at preventing immune deﬁciency during space missions.
Crown Copyright © 2008 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Diagnostics; Immune responses; Molecular biology; Flow cytometry; Optics; Health
1. Introduction system that is fully functional at birth identiﬁes and
eliminates many microorganisms through inﬂammation
As soon as we are exposed to the environment follow— and fever. Later on, we also develop adaptative immune
ing birth, our body develops immune defenses against a defenses allowing the body to mount a speciﬁc and long
huge number of microorganisms. Several layers of pro— lasting response against these organisms, resulting in
tection control bacterial, fungal and Viral growth. Phys— the production of antibodies by B lymphocytes, the ac—
ical and Chemical barriers, such as skin and mucosal tivation of T lymphocytes and the production of mem—
secretions constitute the ﬁrst layer. An innate immune ory cells. The immune system also plays an important
role in the eradication of cancer cells that may persist
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 450926 6419; and proliferate Without this immuno—surveillanee .
fax; +1450 926 4766. Cytotox1c T lymphocytes (CTL) and natural killer
E-mail address: luchino.cohen@space.gc.ca (L.Y. Cohen). (NK) cells can recognize cancer cells that are altered
0094—5765/$—see front matter Crown Copyright © 2008 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2007.12.024

"
"2","770 L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775
following mutations in their genome and directly kill On the other hand, microorganism properties are al—
these cells by releasing lethal molecules on their targets. tered during space ﬂight, often in favor of the microbes.
One of the ﬁrst indications that immune responses The space environment can trigger a faster growth rate
are altered during a space mission was an increased in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis [8], suggest—
frequency of acute respiratory infections, tonsillitis, ing that bacterial proliferation may be higher than on
and other illnesses immediately after return of the as— Earth in some cases. A recent study has demonstrated
tronauts on the ground (Konstantinova IV, NASA Life that Salmonella typhimurium Virulence was higher af—
Science Data Archive). Susceptibility to infections was ter a space shuttle mission, as shown by a higher mor—
also conﬁrmed using ground—based animal models (re— tality rate in a murine infection model. The response
Viewed in [1]). Among the models that simulate space was linked to increased expression of the qu Viru—
ﬂight condition, the hindlimb unloading (HU) rodent lence factor, triggered by an unknown component of the
model has been widely accepted by the scientiﬁc com— space environment [9]. Several studies have revealed an
munity. In this model, rodents are suspended by the tail enhanced resistance to antibiotics during space ﬂight
with no load bearing on the hindlimb and with a head— (summarized in [10]). All these observation point out
down tilt of 15—200. Following infection with the bac— that a reduction in the efﬁciency of immune responses
teria P. aeruginosa, animals in the HU group showed may combine with a higher pathogenicity of microor—
signiﬂcantly increased mortality, reduced time to death, ganisms to increase the risk of infectious diseases dur—
and were less able to Clear bacteria from the organs as ing space ﬂight.
compared with controls [2]. It was shown that a tumor One of the most frequently proposed causes of space—
cell line grows better in HU mice, which demonstrate related immunodeﬁciency is high stress level during
a decrease in spleen size and a signiﬁcantly diminished the missions. Available data support the hypothesis that
delayed—type hypersensitivity response to tumor anti— space ﬂight and other environmental stressors modulate
gens compared with controls [3]. This model conﬁrms normal immune regulation Via stress hormones, includ—
that simulated microgravity affects not only immune ing glucocorticoids [11]. The 11 astronauts who ﬂew
function but also immune cell counts. Early studies on aboard ﬁve US Space Shuttle ﬂights and showed eVi—
Russian cosmonauts have demonstrated that delayed— dence of EBV reactivation had signiﬁcant increases in
type hypersensitivity, a hallmark of cellular immu— urinary epinephrine and norepinephrine as compared
nity, was decreased in several cosmonauts. Pre— vs. with astronauts without EBV reactivation [12]. Con—
post—ﬂight analyses revealed a reduction in blastic comitantly with an increase in EBV—speciﬂc antibod—
transformation and proliferation of lymphocytes, in ies, urinary levels of cortisol and catecholamines were
mitogen—induced production of IL—2 and in the cyto— greater than their pre—ﬂight values on landing day. In a
toxic activity of NK cells [4]. A declineinT lymphocyte limited study, plasma levels of substance P and other
responses to mitogens and reduction in NK cytotoxic neuropeptides were also greater on landing day [6].
activity was also observed after missions in the Salyut Another potential cause for space—related immunodeﬁ—
and Mir stations, especially after long missions. One Ciency could be the relatively sterile environment of the
study suggests that urinary IL—6 excretion was increased spacecrafts. As with muscle atrophy, the lack of immune
on the ﬁrst day of space ﬂight [5]. No reduction in the system stimulation could result in desensitization of im—
level of serum immunoglobulins was detected. Lastly, mune cells [13]. However, the real factors involved in
a decrease in the efﬁciency of the immune system to the reduction of immune responses during space ﬂight
control latent Viruses was also observed during space remain to be Characterized.
ﬂight. In saliva samples collected from Epstein—Barr The main obstacle for a complete understanding of
Virus (EBV)—positive astronauts during 10 space shut— immune dysfunction in space is the lack of on board
tle missions of 5—14 days duration, the number of EBV equipment that would allow monitoring immune re—
copies from samples taken during the ﬂights was signif— sponses throughout the ﬂight, as it is currently done
icantly increased post—ﬂight [6]. Other Viruses such as for cardiovascular responses or muscle function. The
the Varicella Zoster Virus (VSV) are reactivated during size, complexity and power consumption of conven—
space missions. In a study on eight astronauts, 30% of tional analytical tools to study immune function has
saliva samples taken after ﬂight were found positive for precluded so far their inclusion in the shuttle or the In—
VSV DNA whereas all samples from control subjects ternational Space Station (188). More importantly, the
were negative [7]. In summary, space missions affect current Changes in space transportation will strongly re—
the efﬁciency of cellular immune responses involved duce down—mass capacity and sample return in the short
in the control of Viral and tumor growth. term, reinforcing the need for equipment dedicated to

"
"3","L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775 771
in situ analysis. Interestingly, recent developments in a It will allow the quantiﬁcation of soluble factors such as
set of technologies are going to solve these problems. immune hormones (cytokines), antibodies or microor—
The power of modern molecular and cellular biology ganism proteins in the blood, urine or saliva. Further—
assays will be supported by new technologies such as more, using DNA—based assays, it will not only support
micro—optics, micro—ﬂuidics and microelectromechani— the monitoring of gene expression in astronauts, but
cal systems (MEMS), to develop simple and portable also the identiﬁcation of pathogenic microorganisms in
tools better suited for space travels. A suite of small ap— the crew environment. The challenge is to develop a
paratus will be designed to perform all the assays nec— new powerful analytical tool for space science studies,
essary for the adequate monitoring of immune function. which will also be used for standard diagnostic needs
This diagnostic system will monitor astronaut’s immune and monitoring of crew health and environment.
functions during missions in low orbit and will be used To study immune responses in standard laborato—
in long—term missions to monitor crew health and mi— ries, the most widely used technique is without con—
crobial environment. Precise information on immune test ﬂow cytometry (FC). The principle behind FC
responses during space ﬂight will be collected and al— is to stain individual cells with ﬂuorescent molecules
low identifying the mechanisms involved in impaired (ﬂurochromes) speciﬁc for various cell responses and
immune defenses. This kind of diagnostic system will to assess ﬂuorescence levels emitted by stained cells
be able to test new countermeasures to restore normal after passage through a laser beam (Fig. 1). Increase
immune responses. By monitoring on a regular basis or reduction in light emission correlates with the cel—
the activation of immune cells or variations in cytokine lular response. Photomultiplier detectors equipped
levels, underlying infections will be identiﬁed even ear— with ﬁlters allow the quantiﬁcation of light emitted
lier than the appearance of symptoms and treated with at different wavelengths, as well as the laser beam
more efﬁciency, similarly to blood glucose testers for scattering that is a function of size and structure of
diabetic patients. the cells. There are several ways to label cells de—

pending on the parameter targeted. For instance, eX—
2. Functionalities 0f the diagnostic system pression of speciﬁc surface proteins can be detected
with ﬂuorochrome—labeled antibodies. Calcium ﬂuxes
To provide a comprehensive View of the immune sta— through the plasma membrane are quantiﬁed using cell
tus of astronauts, the equipment will have to support the permeable calcium—binding probes that have a differ—
analysis of cellular as well as humoral responses. The ent behaVior depending on calcium concentration. Cell
parameters analyzed using the diagnostic system will Viability can be assessed using ﬂuorescent dyes able
include immune cell number, activation and speciﬁcity. to pass through the plasma membrane and that are
Cell suspenSIon 7' Sheath
Detectors
O
o \
O Dichroic A F'It
| ers .
° 0 / m:> ai'slftzttn
focusmg O 0 / E
o / $3 > ﬂ
Laser beam ! _ % Computer
. 4.‘ analysis
Forward light
scatter detector
Fig. 1. Principles of ﬂow cytometry: following staining with ﬂuorescent molecules, cells are hydrodynamically aligned using a ﬂuid sheath and
pass through a laser beam one by one. Fluorescence signal and light scattering are collected using a set of ﬁlters for different wavelengths,
allowing the analysis of multiple parameters for each cell. Data are collected and integrated using specialized software.

"
"4","772 L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775
actively ejected from living cells. The percentage of di— to current commercial devices, are required. Typically,
Viding cells is established following staining using DNA ﬂow cytorneters are instruments that demand constant
intercalating ﬂuorescent probes revealing the amount of maintenance, high electrical power consumption and of—
DNA within cells. It is also possible to monitor the ac— ten a specialized operator. Their mass and volume is
tivation of white blood cells able to recognize a speciﬁc large and incompatible with space requirements. Fur—
microorganism using complex protein probes. This as— ther, ﬂow cytorneters use a sheath ﬂuid to hydrodynami—
say called tetramer staining quantiﬁes the percentage of cally focus the particles passing through the laser beam.
activated cells speciﬁc for a particular Virus or bacteria. This sheath ﬂuid increases instrumental complexity and
FC also has the power to quantify the level of creates large volumes of biohazard material that must be
soluble molecules in a sample (blood, urine or saliva for handled in some manner. These instruments are also not
instance). Using ﬂuorescent microbeads labeled with designed for supporting launch conditions since bulk
antibodies, the concentration of several molecules such optics are often used whose alignment tolerances are
as cytokines, antibodies, or proteins can be assessed tight and can be perturbed by Vibrations.
simultaneously. This is the principle of the Cytometric An innovative micro—ﬂow cytometer is under devel—
Bead Array (CBA®) assay. Thus by supporting the opment at INO that meets the constraints imposed by
detection of molecules produced very early during an space travel (Fig. 2). The micro—ﬂow cytometer com—
immune response, infections will be identiﬁed very bines INO’s ﬁber—based ﬂow cytometer and its micro—
quickly. The cytokine proﬁle will indicate whether it optical bench resulting in a device that is on the order
is a cellular response involved in the clearance of a of several square centimeters in size. INO’s platform
Virus or if the response is more targeted to bacterial of turns on a custom designed optical ﬁber through which
fungal infection. Therefore, the diagnostic system will a hole is transversally bored by laser micro—machining.
include a miniature ﬂow cytometer with an innovative The analyte solution is injected into the hole of the ﬁber
design as described in the next section. from a ﬂow chamber and the particles of interest are
The development of DNA—based assays commonly probed by light propagated along the optical “counting”
referred to as molecular biology techniques have greatly ﬁber. Fluorescence emission and scattering is propa—
improved the capacity of researchers to understand how gated along the same counting ﬁber, in the arm follow—
immune cells contribute to the defense against microor— ing the hole. This conﬁguration eliminates bulky optics
ganisrns and cancer cells. By quantifying gene expres— and offers the possibility of eliminating the traditional
sion in immune cells, a lot of information can be gained hydrodynamic focusing subsystem resulting in a global
on the status of immune activation and response. More— simpliﬁcation of the system. The use of the counting
over, molecular biology is on the brink of revolution— ﬁber reduces mass and volume by eliminating optical
izing the identiﬁcation of microorganisms in samples components and increases robustness for launch condi—
of the environment. When the sequence of bases that tions, as no alignment is required after assembly. Low
constitutes the genome of a living being is known, it power consumption light sources are used, such as pig—
is possible to design nucleic acid probes to identify tailed diode lasers in the blue and red regions, whose
its presence through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) light can be directly coupled into the excitation end of
and/or DNA microarray. the ﬁber optic ﬂow cytometer. This technology has been
demonstrated for counting live bacteria in a mixture of
3. Miniature ﬂow cytometer live and dead bacteria.
INO’s multifunctional rnicro—optical bench (see
In order to integrate a ﬂow cytometer, drastic re— Fig. 3) is a 3—D integration platform for passive (e.g.
ductions in carbon and spatial footprints, with respect lens) and active (e.g. lasers) components in much the
Fig. 2. Schematic of counting ﬁber (top View): stained cells Will be exposed to light excitation Within the optical counting ﬁber propagating
the light. From a ﬂow chamber, cells transit through a hole in the counting ﬁber and ﬂuorochromes are excited Within the ﬁber core.

"
"5","L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775 773
45°Ref|ector
r-—_—-—:
Fiber -'-'-'-'- “W‘ -'-'-'—= Interlevel
i: Collimatinglens A self—alignment
-'-'-'-'- _ m- -'-'-'-'-
E.
W"" /
Fig. 3. Schematic of rnicro—optical bench prototype (inset is a photograph of a typical micro—packaged MOEMS device): this micro—optical
bench integrates passive and active components on the micron scale.
Excitation to flow source and detector Will be integrated onto the bench
cytometer \ (see Fig. 4).
\ . - Excitation module
/ 4. DNA-based assays
Fiber—based The Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie (CRI)
flow cytometer Collection module of Université Laval in Quebec City (Dr Michel
G. Bergeron) and other researchers from U. Laval
/ are now proposing to develop an integrated, fully
‘ _ _ automated, and single—step portable micro—ﬂuidic
‘ MlcrOOptlcal benCh laboratory—on—a—COInpact disc (lab—CD) device for the
rapid (<1h) detection of microbial nucleic acids in
/ . water. On board spaceships and inhabited space sta—
Scattered eXCItatIon + collected . . . . .
fluorescence t10ns, this equipment Will be used to determine the
_ _ _ _ level of contamination of water production systems, in
F1g. 4. Conceptual schematlc 0f micro—ﬂow cytometer: 1n a ﬁrst . . . . .
step, the micro—optical bench Will be connected to excitation and order to mlmmlze p otentlal health rISkS t0 the crew.
collection modules using optical ﬁbers. Later on, the source and It Will also be used to monitor gene eXpreSSion in
detector will be integrated to the bench. astronaut White blood cells, to assess immune cell ac—
tivation. In many years of this ongoing collaboration,
we have developed state of the art technologies and
same way that an optical table is but on the micron know—how such as (a)nuc1eic acid extraction methods,
scale. The prototype developmental work done at INC is (b) database of conserved microbial genes, (c) detailed
based on micro—fabrication processes developed for its phenotypic and genotypic analysis of 16,000 microbial
MEMS and MOEMS (micro—Optical electromechanical strains, ((1) preparation of DNNRNA—free reagents, (e)
systems) devices. The ﬁrst prototype bench consisted of micro—ﬂuidic technologies, (f) cationic polythiophene
two levels on each of Which are assembled ﬁve optical biosensors, (g) optical detection, (h) materials sci—
ﬁbers, 21 micro—lens and amicro—reﬂector. Current devel— ence, (i) micro— and nanofabrication technologies, and
opment is directed towards integrating the ﬂow cytome— (j) automated micro—ﬂuidic processes on CD, Which
ter into the micro—optical bench platform by expanding are protected by numerous patents. In recent years,
the latter to include optical ﬁlters and dichroic mirrors the integration of nucleic acid extraction methods,
thus enabling it to separate, and independently process, real—time PCR, microarray hybridization, micro—
different wavelengths Within the device. The bench Will ﬂuidic technologies, optical detection, and micro— and
then be integrated to the optical ﬁber Via standard con— nanofabrication led to the development of the ﬁrst two
nectors external to the bench. The ensemble Will form FDA—approved rapid (< 1h) real—time PCR assays (BD
the ﬂow cytometer. In a further developmental step, the GeneOhm TM Strep B and BD GeneOhm TM MRSA)

"
"6","774 L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775

and 0f the ﬁrst CD—based micro—ﬂuidic device capable cytometer has been produced to date. Similarly, the
of performing DNA hybridization on a microarray, at automation and miniaturization of DNA—based assays
room temperature in 15 min [14]. will have a tremendous impact on Earth medical care.

On board a spaceship, environmental monitoring
must be extremely rapid and sensitive to minimize
exposure to contaminants. However, conventional Acknowledgments
methods for achieving these goals seldom necessitate
sample concentration, molecular ampliﬁcation and/or This WOTk was supported by the Canadian Space
labeling of nucleic acid target(s) and/or probes, even Agency.
microbiological culture for enrichment. For this lab—CD
aiming for the direct detection of nucleic acids present References
in a water sample, we will exploit the Charge—based
deteetien by cationic polythiophene biosensors. More [1] G. Sonnenfeld, The immune system in space, including Earth—
speciﬁcally, we Will implement 0n the lab—CD the Sig— based beneﬁts of space—based research, Current Pharmaceutical
nal ampliﬁcation method (ﬂuorescence Chain reaction BiOteChnOlOgy 6 (2005) 343—349-

01, FCR) invented by HO et a1. [15], a method that was [2] H. AV1les, T. Bel.a3f,.K. Fountaln, M. Vance, G.Sor1nenfeld,
. . Increased suscept1b111ty t0 Pseudomonas aeruglnosa 1nfect10n
shown to efﬂc1ently detect ﬁve (5) molecules in 3mL . . . . . .
under hindlimb—unloading conditions, Journal of Applled
Of water With a CUStOl’Il blue—LED 11110111116161. FCR Physiology 95 (2003) 73—80.
Operates 111 WatCl‘ at tCmPCI‘atUI‘CS ranging thWCCH 55 [3] EH. Lee, W. Ding, AD. Kulkarni, R.D. Granstein, Tumor
and 65 OC and the inclusion of a ﬂuorophore—labeled growth and immune function in mice during hin-limb
probe for a universal genetic target will render the 3532312; ‘As‘zglﬁon Space and EnVironmental Medicme 76
detection Of mICI‘Oblal DNA p0ss1ble. C.D_based p 12.“— [4] I.V. Konstantinova, M.P. Rykova, A.T. Lesnyak, EA.
forms are amenable to samp 16 preparation, C611 IYSIS’ Antropova, Immune changes during long—duration missions,
molecular hybridization and detection by ﬂuorescence— Journal of Leukocyte Biology 54 (1993) 189—201.
based mechanisms and current progress towards micro— [5] TR Stein, M.D. Schluter, Excretion of IL-6 by astronauts during
fabricated devices made of thermoplastics is promising. Spaceﬂight, American Journal of Physiology Endocrinology and
Metabolism (1994) 266.
. [6] D.L. Pierson, R.P. Stowe, T.M. Phillips, DJ. Lugg, S.K. Mehta,
5' Conclusmn Epstein—Barr Virus shedding by astronauts during space ﬂight,
Brain Behavior and Immunity 19 (2005) 235—242.

Modern molecular and cellular techniques are now [7] SK. Mehta, R.J. Cohrs, B. Forghani, G. Zerbe, D.H. Gilden,
required to ensure that an astronaut crew stays healthy D.L. Pierson, Stress—induced subclinical reactivation of varicella
during long—duration space missions. If their micro— zoster Virus in astronauts, Journal of Medical Virology 72

. . (2004) 174—179.
bial enVironment cannot be controlled perfectly, we , ,

. . . [8] MA. Kacena, GA. Merrell, B. Manfredi, E.E. Smith, D.M.
need to develop the tOOIS that W111 allow SClenUStS Klaus, P. Todd, Bacterial growth in space ﬂight: logistic growth
to deVelOp countermeasures againSt space—related im' curve parameters for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis,
mune deﬁciency, as well as improve our capacity to Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 51 (1999) 229—234.
monitor the microbial environment with very high [9] J.W. Wilson, CM. Ott, KH. Zu Bentfllpa R- Ramamufthy, L.
sensitivity. Introducing highly automated cellular and QUiCk’ 5' POIWOHik’ P' Cheng’ M' McClelland, G' Tsapraﬂis’
molecular biology assays will strongly enhance our ca— TIRadabaugh’ A' .Hunt’ D' Fernandez’ 13' Rmhter.’ M' Shah’ M'

Kllcoyne, L. Joshl, M. Nelman—Gonzalez, S. H1ng, M. Parra,
pacity to prevent the development ofinfectious diseases P. Dumas, K. Norwood, R. Bober, J. DeViCh, A. Ruggles,
in conﬁned and isolated environments. By monitoring C. Goulart, M. Rupert, L. Stodieck, P. Stafford, L. Catella,
the astronaut’s immune responses on one side, and MJ. Schurr, K. Buchanan, L. MOI‘iCi, J. McCracken, P. Allen,
their environment on the other side, this new set of di— C; Baker'COISman’ T' Hammond’ J' V9961, R' Nelson’ P'L'
agnostic tools will ﬁll our knowledge gap and decrease Plerson’ HM StefanyShyII—PIPGI’ C'A' NICkerSOH’ Space ﬂlght

. . . alters bacterlal gene express10n and V1rulence and reveals a
one Of the HSkS 0f space m1ss10ns. The deVelOpment Of role for global regulator qu, Proceedings of the National
21 micro—ﬂow cytometer with the Characteristics needed Academy Sciences of the United States of America 104 (2007)
for space ﬂight (low power consumption, small foot— 16299-16304.
print) combined With the lOW cost Of optical ﬁbers and [10] D..M Klaus, H..N Howarcl, Antibiotic efﬁcaey and microbial
micro—fabrication will have great impact on point—of— 833231263 1d??? Space ﬂlght’ Trends In BIOteChnOIOgy 24
care diagnostics, diagnostics facilities in remote areas [11] R. Meehan, P. Whitson, C. Sams, The role of psychoneur0_
and resource—poor countries and in situ environmental endocrine factors on Spaceﬂight_induced immunological
monitoring and control. No commercial micro—ﬂow alterations, Journal of Leukocyte Biology 54 (1993) 236—244.

"
"7","L.Y. Cohen et al. / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 769—775 775
[12] RP. Stowe, S.K. Mehta, AA. Ferrando, D.L. Feeback, D.L. L. Bissonnette, M. Ouellette, M.G. Bergeron, Micro—
Pierson, Immune responses and latent herpesvirus reactivation ﬂuidic device for rapid (< 15 min) automated microarray
in spaceﬂight, Aviation Space and Environmental Medicine 72 hybridization, Clinical Chemistry 51 (2005) 1836—1844.
(2001) 884—891. [15] HA. H0, K. Dore, M. Boissinot, M.G. Bergeron, R.M. Tanguay,
[13] I.V. Konstantinova, Y.G. NefedOV, V.M. Shilov, Normalization D. Boudreau, M. Leclerc, Direct molecular detection of nucleic
0f the immune status of the human body during prolonged acids by ﬂuorescence signal ampliﬁcation, Journal of American
space ﬂight, Life Sciences and Space Research 9 (1971) 17—21. Chemical Society 127 (2005) 12673—12676.
[14] R. PeytaVi, F.R. Raymond, D. Gagne, F.J. Picard,
G. Jia, J. Zoval, M. Madou, K. Boissinot, M. Boissinot,

"
