"","x"
"1","Adv. Space Res. Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 611-618, 2002
© 2002 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
@ Pergamo“ Printed in GreatBritain
_ 0273-1177/02 $22.00 + 0.00

www.elscwer.com/locate/asr PII: 80273-1 177(01)00651-2

STUDY OF THERMOCAPILLARY FLOW IN A LIQUID BRIDGE
TOWARDS AN ON-ORBIT EXPERIMENT ABOARD THE
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION
H. Kawamura', I. Ueno‘, and T. Ishikawa2
’Science University of T okyo, 2641, Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba 278-8510, JAPAN
2National Space Agency ofJapan (NASDA), 1-1, Sengen 2, T sukuba-shi, Ibaraki 3 05-85 05, JAPAN
ABSTRACT
The Japan Experimental Module (JEM) is now under construction to be installed aboard the International Space
Station (188) in 2005. The Fluid Physics Experiment Facility (FPEF) is one of the test facilities constituting JEM.
Speciﬁcations of FPEF are outlined. A thermocapillary convection experiment is now planned and prepared by
the authors’ group for an on-orbit experiment with the use of FPEP at JEM. A series of terrestrial experiments is
now being conducted for (the preparation of the on-orbit experiment. Among the obtained results, the critical
condition of the steady-unsteady transition and the modal structure of oscillation are described. An observed
peculiar phenomenon of the particle accumulation is also reported and the types of accumulation structures which
were encountered are discussed. © 2002 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
DEVELOPMENT OF FLUID PHYSICS EXPERIMENT FACILITY FOR JEM OF 188

The International Space Station is now under construction on orbit. Japan is now constructing a module
called Japan Experiment Module (JEM). JEM is recently nicknamed as ‘Kibo,’ which means ‘hope for the future’
in Japanese. Kibo is the ﬁrst Japanese manned module in which a maximum of four astronauts can perform
experimental activities. Kibo, as shown in Figure 1, consists of the Pressurized Module (PM), Exposed Facility
(BF) and related auxiliary facilities such as the storage area and the Remote Manipulator System (RMS). Its
operation is now expected to start in 2005.

The Fluid Physics Experimental Facility (FPEF) is designed to conduct a variety of ﬂuid physics experiments
at a moderate temperature under the microgravity. Figure 2 shows an overview of the F PEF. The FPEF consists
of two parts; a core part and an experiment cell. The core part provides such fundamental functions as interfacing
to the JEM system, supplying necessary resources to the experiment cell and communication with data acquisition
apparatus. The core part will remain in JEM for at least 3 years, while an experiment cell will be removed after
the completion of its own experiment.

The data acquisition systems to be equipped in FPEF are:

(1) CCD camera for overview of liquid bridge,

(2) Infrared camera for surface temperature measurement,

(3) PTV system for three dimensional velocity ﬁeld measurement,

(4) Photo-chromic actuation system for surface velocity measurement and
(5) UVP sensors for internal ﬂow ﬁeld measurement.

The three-dimensional ﬂow ﬁeld will be measured by means of PTV (Particle Tracking Velocimetry). Three
CCD cameras are installed behind a transparent hot disk to track the movement of tracer particles. Three images
are captured into a computer and the 3-D flow ﬁeld can be reconstructed after necessary data processing. This
technique has been already veriﬁed through experiments with the use of the TR-IA sounding rocket. Besides the
3-D ﬂow ﬁeld measurement, the surface velocity will be measured by the photo-chromic method, in which mixed

611

"
"2","612 H. Kawamura et al.
, ~ Experiment Logistics Module:
“3‘"" / Pressurized Section (‘ELM—PS)
. - me Manipulator
t W2§{:»§?r,;%:dl ' m“! myete m {JEMRMS}
, - .. ' Q; .._._f;. _.,.. : ~ /
/ iy‘é 93“ 33% z 1:
P re s 31.1 nzed a #3; at
MOG me {pm} $25 Wi‘? n w ’52,, 7‘”
.. -_ :/ ‘ 1'""
Exposed Facility {H j; W Experiment Logistics Module:
Exposed Sectton (‘ELM-PS)
Fig. 1. Japan Experiment Module (JEM) nicknamed as ‘Kibo' of International Space Station (ISS).
W’V
JJ- -11.- - 'I ‘ \/:/ \;\
- W‘\ {3 ""r1! '
E6‘i«\|?ri ' 1i:
3-""; ’ / l. f: ‘9!-
_ - V .I . ' b ‘§_'. .1' I
T ' i’dégzl I“!J‘.§,?§?’? 1‘3). 2. ,
. ' ~. ""1/ M ""3:34: ‘g
Q“ 935i? «352/ l
‘ l 3 /""
b- / ' -'
ﬁ‘hr‘ /1/>// ® '//llﬁ4!
Q/ / u‘ ®® 7,.--“/i _
0 ® ”
‘ FF - ‘
V a a ' |_.
Fig. 2. Overview of the Fluid Physics Experimental Facility (FPEF).
dye is activated and colored for a short period with the exposure of a laser beam. The dye concentration and the
laser intensity are so adjusted as to color only the thin layer close to the ﬂuid surface. Furthermore, the internal
ﬂow velocity will be obtained using the UVP (Ultrasonic Velocity Proﬁle) based on the Doppler shift. Because of
the limitation of space, all the measurement devices cannot be installed in one experiment cell simultaneously.
Therefore, two types of experiment cell are being prepared. Table 1 shows the experiment cells and their
diagnostic capabilities.
The liquid bridge formable in the experiment cell is 30 or 50 mm in diameter and 80 mm in the maximum
length. Maximum and minimum temperatures are 100 and 5 °C at its hot and cold ends, respectively.
An Engineering Model of the FPEF and Marangoni-experiment cells has been already manufactured. Several
tests have been conducted to ensure the function of mechanical, electrical and optical interfaces between FPEF and
experiment cells. Necessary modiﬁcations for the Flight Models are proposed and being examined. The

"
"3","Study of Thermocapillary Flow in a Liquid Bridge 613
fabrication of a Flight Model of the Marangoni experiment cell will be started in the end of 2001. The FPEF will
be on-board in 2005.

Table 1 Exeriment cells and their dianostics caabili
————-nl

The present authors proposed a series of Marangoni convection experiments on Kibo and were selected as a
candidate for possible on-orbit experiments. The obj ectives of the experiment are as following;
1. Conﬁrmation of the function of test facilities and measurement equipment.

2. Re-examination of the critical condition for the transition to unsteady flow.
3. Further understanding of unsteady Marangoni convection in the liquid bridge.

Although a large amount of data have been accumulated on the critical condition from the steady to the
unsteady ﬂow, there still remain fundamental uncertainties such as the effects of diameter and height. This is
because the attainable size of the liquid bridge is limited in terrestrial experiments and also because the heating
time is limited in sounding—rocket experiments, even if a large liquid bridge can be formed. Thus the experiments
on the Space Station are essential to examine the transition criterion for a thick liquid bridge with a slowly varied
temperature difference.

Furthermore, the three-dimensional measurement of the ﬂow ﬁeld and the simultaneous determination of the
surface temperature and velocity are prepared. This information will signiﬁcantly contribute to further
understanding and control of the unsteady ﬂow in the liquid bridge. A large diameter will also result in a large
Marangoni number Ma and thus the chaotic and/or turbulent state, which can be studied least in the terrestrial
experiment. The large-diameter liquid bridge, on the other hand, requires a longer time for thermal diffusion
inside. This can also be ﬁrst enabled by a long-duration experiment on the ISS.

TERRESTRIAL PREPARATION

A series of preparatory small-scale experiments has been conducted. Major purposes of the terrestrial
experiment are: (1) to re-examine the effects of diameter and height upon the critical Marangoni number of the
transition to the unsteady ﬂow and also upon the oscillation frequency; and (2) to study the ﬂow regime beyond
the critical point and to make comparison with numerical simulations developed in parallel. These are of essential
importance to properly plan the on-orbit experiment.

As mentioned above, the size of the liquid bridge attainable in the terrestrial experiments is seriously limited
compared with those in a space environment. The allowable temperature difference AT is also limited owing to the
evaporation of the test ﬂuid. These factors impose a severe limitation on the accomplishable Ma in terrestrial
experiments. To overcome these difﬁculties, experiments are being performed in a low-temperature environment
to realize a larger temperature difference while suppressing the evaporation of the test ﬂuid. Thus, a series of
experiments with a higher Marangoni number can be conducted in spite of the size limitation in normal gravity.

The system, furthermore, brings us another opportunity to observe a new kind of phenomenon in the liquid-
bridge convection. The ﬂow ﬁeld is usually visualized by small particles put into the ﬂuid as tracers.
Accumulations of the particles were occasionally observed (e.g., Kawamura and Harada, 1998) in the particle-
suspending ﬂow. Such motions of the particles themselves, however, had not been paid much attention. Recently
Schwabe et a1. (1996) and Schwabe (1999) concentrated their attention upon the dynamics of the particles, naming
it the particle accumulation structure (PAS). The PAS has been encountered also in the present study and a new
type of the accumulation structure has been observed.

Experimental Apparatus

The experimental apparatus is shown in Figure 3. The whole apparatus was installed in a refrigerator to
maintain the ambient temperature at about -20 °C in order to suppress the evaporation of ﬂuid while realizing a
large temperature difference. Silicone oil of l, 2 and 5 cSt (at 25 °C) was employed as the test ﬂuid. Their Prandtl

"
"4","614 H. Kawamura et al.
numbers were 16.0, 28.2 and 68.8 at 25 °C, respectively. A liquid bridge of silicone oil was formed between the
cylindrical rods. Three sets of hot and cold rods with end surfaces of 2, 5 and 7 mm in diameter were employed.
The aspect ratio Ar (= H / D) was varied from 0.15 to 1.20, where H and D are the height and the diameter of the
bridge, respectively. The volume ratio of the bridge was kept constant at very close to unity. The upper rod was
made of sapphire, which enabled us to observe the ﬂow ﬁeld in the bridge from the top end surface. The lower rod
was made of aluminum whose sidewall was chemically coated to prevent wetting by the liquid. A temperature
difference AT between the rods was imposed by heating the upper rod with electric current. The difference AT was
increased up to 100 K at a constant small increment of 0.1 K/s, which was conﬁrmed in advance to have little
inﬂuence upon the critical condition for the transition. Several kinds of nearly density-matched particles of
various diameters and shapes were suspended in the liquid as tracers. The dispersion density of the particles was
also varied. The ﬂow ﬁeld was observed by two CCD cameras; one from the top and the other from the side.
CCD Camera
Heater Light
Liquid Bridge @
1/ \\
_
ppcr Disk
m Thermocouplc
CCD Camera
Silicone Oil&Traccr \‘ / Light
Thermocou lc "" ©
Lower Disk{-15‘C) V
""cam g.
__;
- Horizontal devica -
Fig. 3. Apparatus for terrestrial experiment.
Results and Discussions
CH]: 1.. EI .. EEI E
The ﬂow ﬁeld exhibited a transition from 2-D steady flow to 3-D time-dependent ﬂow when a certain AT or
critical Marangoni number Mac was exceeded. F igure 4 shows the critical condition in terms of the Marangoni
number, which is deﬁned with the bridge height H as the characteristic length L:
0' AT ~ H
Ma=—T——~——
leC
In this ﬁgure preceding experimental results by Velten er al. (1991) and Musad et a1. (1997) are also plotted.
It was noted that the temperature dependence of the ﬂuid viscosity cannot be neglected in experiments with a large
AT. Thus, the ﬂuid viscosity was evaluated at the average temperature of the bridge T = (T H + TL)/2 with the use of
the following correlation given by Shin-Etsu Chem. Co., Ltd, (1991):
v T 25 — T
Q = exp[5.892 W]
1/0 273.15 + T
where T is in °C and 1/0 the kinematic viscosity at 25 °C.

"
"5","Study of Themocapillary Flow in a Liquid Bridge 615
Figure 4 indicates that the critical Marangoni number Mac for the lower aspect ratio is practically independent
of D and Ar with the value of Mac = (1 ~ 2) x104, while it slightly depends upon the Prandtl number Pr of the ﬂuid.
At higher aspect ratie of Ar > 0.5, on the ether hand, the critical Marangeni number is not constant but increases
appreciably with Ar. This tendency is partly because of the experimental difﬁcuity in this region. That is, as the
aspect ratio approaches close to unity, more pronounced shape deformation causes an additional effect upon the
ﬂow ﬁeld. Mereover, since a thin diameter is used in this region uncertainty in the determination of the critical
point increases. These uncertainties are, however, an order of several tens % at most, and cannot solely explain
the large dependence of the Mac upon the aspect ratios around Ar ~ 1. The main reason would be attributed to the
inherent dependency of the critical Maraegeni number epen the aspect ratie Ar §tself. The thin solid line in the
ﬁgure indicates the envelope of the present results. This envelope exhibits the most dangerous Marangoni number
for a given aspect ratio. Noted again that the critical Marangoni number slightly depends upon the aspect ratio at
lower Ar, and it increases abruptly at higher Ar. Such a trend is in good agreement with the one found by the
linear stability theory by Wanschura et ai. (1995). '
Velten et al., (1991)
5 NaNO; Pr~“=7.025 Dmémm
ti? C24H58 P949 D=6mm
g; 105 Masud et al., (1997) (Silicone oil)
-~ g Scst PF54~59 D=2mm
3}: - SestPr=54~59 023mm
3 A
V A A
l— t .3, ._ A
o ‘ O ““9“ A 3' > ,J‘ .A A ll
.9 ‘g Oti;,,:;_‘:. :533'?”
E 4 ‘ eguein'gii; ‘5‘; 3‘}: '- A
3 1O 01..€ﬁ!5‘o""--393 ’""é‘ir‘ ' , 4'
z Me!» met.)
,_ {<3 0 {?fte‘” A.
C 9' t d I I ‘
0
U) Imm-
g IEI-n-
5 man“
10'1 1
Aspect Ratio (HID)
Fig. 4. Critical Marangoni number for various liquid-bridge diameter, aspect ratio and Prandtl number
of the fluid.
WWW
After the onset of the oscillatory ﬂow, certain polygonal modal ﬂow structures were observed through the
visualization with the suspended particles in the test fluid. The sketches of the modal structures from the top end
surface are shown in Figure 5. An eccentric circle (mode number m = 1),‘ ellipse (m = 2), triangle (m = 3) or
successive polygons (m 2 4) appeared in the liquid column. Tiny particles dispersed in the region between the free
surface and the outer beeedazy ef the pelygen, 38d eever broke iete the inside ef the polygonal region once the
modal structure was established. At the early stage, the modal structure ﬁrst exhibited a pulsative oscillation.
With increasing AT, the polygonal region in the bridge then started to rotate azimuthally, although the movement
7t 211/3 n/2 27:15
(3) Mode 1 (b) Mode 2 (c) Mode 3 (d) Mode 4 (e) Mode 5
Fig. 5‘ Sketch of modal structures of the ﬂow fietd.

"
"6","616 H. Kawamura et al.
(a)-(1) 2 cSt (a)—(2) 5 cSt
(D=2, Ar=0.77) (D=2, Ar=0.87)
, ~' ""V 2- .‘w ‘ .
(b)-(1) 1 cSt (b)-(2) 2 cSt (b)-(3) 5 cSt
(D=5, AFOAO) (D=5, Ar=0.45) (D=5, Ar=0.42)
(CH1) 1 cSt (c)-(2) 2 cSt (CH3) 5 cSt
(D=5, Ar=0.34) (D=7, Ar=0.36) (D=5, Ar=0.36)
(d)-(1) 1 cSt (d)-(2) 2 cSt (d)-(3) 5 cSt
(D=5, Ar=0.27) (D=7, Ar=0.24) (D=7, Ar=0.27)
(e)-(1) 2 cSt (e)-(2) 5 cSt
(D=7, Ar=0.24) (D=7, Ar=0.24)
Fig. 6. Top views of modal structures: (a) m = 1, (b) m = 2, (c) m = 3, (d) m = 4 and (e) m = 5.

"
"7","Study of Thermocapillary Flow in a Liquid Bridge 617
of each particle stayed almost radial. The direction of rotation was both clockwise and counterclockwise and
could not be predicted, which was thought to be an evidence of symmetric experimental conﬁguration. Further
increasing AT, distinct modal structure disappeared and the particles dispersed again into the whole region.

Typical modal structures observed from the top end surface are presented in F igure 6. Experimental
conditions are given below each picture. The edge of the polygon becomes sharper with decreasing ﬂuid viscosity.
The distributions of the mode number m and the product m x Ar are plotted versus the aspect ratio in Figure 7.
Experiments with various Prandtl numbers and diameters are included. Figure 7 indicates that the mode number of
the ﬂow structure is mainly determined by the aspect ratio as found already by Preisser et al. (1983). It was almost
independent of Prandtl number of the ﬂuid and the diameter of the bridge. Moreover the product of m x Ar
remains roughly unity as pointed out also by Preisser et a1. (1983). More detailed inspection of F igure 7 indicates
that there exist discrete aspect-ratio regions in which a certain single mode appeared under if m x Ar is very close
to the unity. On the other hand, as the value of the product deviates from the unity, two or three successive mode
numbers appear at a given Ar with different AT. In these regions one could not predict which mode number ﬁrst
appeared at the onset of the oscillation.

2
h
1.5 <
ﬂap 5!? A X
M 1 E
:9
6 DIED 0-5
m
5 CIIED Imm-
IEI---
4 ' ""'“° munu-
E 3 Damn) mun:-
2 (1mm
1 mm A
0 -1
1 0 1
Aspect Ratio (H/D)
Fig. 7. Correlation between the mode number and the aspect ratio.
T°p 1 . r . . ;
,. ,, ,. , TOd '
t 9 (b) Steady M (c) Lump
» a F"" .. Bottom 7 . a r .
(a) Steady flow i ;
(d) Twist I (e) Twist || "" i
(f) Twist | + Twist ll (9) TWiSt | + Lump
Fig. 8. Variation of Particle Accumulation Structure (PAS). Top view (left) and Side view (right).

"
"8","618 H. Kawamura et al.

El E l S . . I E .

Most of the existing works have focused their attention upon the ﬂow regime not far beyond the critical point.
In the present study, on the other hand, the suppression of evaporation enabled us to attain much higher
temperature differences than the critical one. A peculiar phenomenon encountered beyond the critical point was
the accumulation of the tracer particles. At a very early stage with a small temperature difference, the particles
dispersed uniformly in the whole bridge. With increasing AT beyond the critical point, several types of the particle
accumulation structure were observed. That is, ‘Steady Ring,’ ‘Lump,’ and ‘Twisted Loop (TL).’ Figure 8
presents the top and side views of these particle accumulation structures.

The particle accumulation structures of ‘Steady Ring’ and ‘Lump’ have been reported in earlier papers
(Schwabe et a1. 1996, Kawamura and Harada 1998, Schwabe 1999). The structure named Twist I here was also
observed occasionally in the previous studies (Kawamura and Harada 1998, Schwabe 1999). The present work
revealed that there existed two fundamental types of ‘TL-PAS’; Twist I (see Figure 8 -(d)) and Twist II (Figure 8 -
(e)). The latter contained one more twisted structure and appeared at a larger AT than Twist I. Combinations of
Lump and Loop and also Twist I and II were observed as seen in F igure 8. It was noticed that the TL emerged
only in rotational oscillation and never in pulsative one. Further study on the relation between the PAS and the
ﬂow ﬁeld and the reason of the occurrence of PAS will be continued.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The construction of the Japan Experimental Module (Kibo) and the manufacturing of the Fluid Physics
Experiment Facility (FPEF) are progressed. A series of terrestrial experiments on the thermocapillary convection
in a liquid bridge is being conducted, which serves as a basis for planning of the on—orbit experiment. The critical
condition of the steady-to-unsteady transition was reexamined and the modal structure of oscillation was
investigated in relation to the aspect ratio of the liquid bridge. A peculiar phenomenon of the particle
accumulation was observed and several types of the accumulation structures were reported. The terrestrial studies
will be continued including numerical simulation in order to realize a successful on~orbit experiment aboard
International Space Station expected at present in 2005.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The preparation of the on-orbit experiment is carried out in collaboration with NASDA. The terrestrial
research is conducted in collaboration with Dr. M. Ohnishi of National Aerospace Laboratory and Prof. K. Nishino
of Yokohama National University. The terrestrial work is ﬁnancially supported by the Grant-in~Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan, by Institute of Space and Astronautical
Sciences, and also by Science University of Tokyo. The authors would like to express their thanks to Prof. Dr.
Schwabe at Giessen University for attracting their attention to the particle accumulation structures and for his
fruitful discussions.

REFERENCES

Kawamura, H. and Harada, N., Observation of Oscillatory Marangoni Convection in a Liquid Column, Proc. of
35th National Heat T ransfer Symposium of Japan, 111, pp.749-750 (in J apanese), 1998.

Masud, J., Kamotani, Y. and Ostrach, S., Oscillatory Thermocapillary Flow in Cylindrical Columns of High
Prandtl Number F luids, J. T hermaphysics and Heat T rans., Vol. 11, pp. 105-1 1 l, 1997.

Preisser, F., Schwabe, D. and Scharmann, A., Steady and Oscillatory Thermocapillary Convection in Liquid
Columns with F ree Cylindrical Surface, J. F luid Mech, Vol. 126, pp.545-567, 1983.

Schwabe, D., Hintz, P. and Frank, S., New Features of Thermocapillary Convection in Floating Zones Revealed by
Tracer Particles Accumulation Structures (PAS), Microgravity Sci. T echnol., 1X/3, pp.l63-168, 1996.

Schwabe, D., Particle Accumulation Structures (PAS) in Thermocapillary Flow in Floating Zones, Proc. 2”""
European Symp. on the Utilization 0fthe International Space Station (Noordwijk, The Netherlands, Nov. 1998),
pp. 233-240, 1999.

Shin-Etsu Chemical Co., Ltd., T echm’cal Note -Silicone Oil KF 96 - (in Japanese), 1991.

Velten, R., Schwabe, D. and Scharrnann, A., The Periodic Instability of Thermocapillary Convection in Cylindrical
Liquid Bridges, Phys. Fluids, A3(2), pp. 267-279, 1991.

Wanschura, M., Shevtsova, V. M., Kuhlmann, H. C. and Rath, H. J., Convective Instability Mechanisms in

Thermocapillary Liquid Bridges, Phys. Fluids, 7(5), pp. 912-925, 1995.

"
