"","x"
"1","L???” * i t__ ' ”ﬁttﬂ bg’
ﬁat; i5 43%,?” INTERNATIONAL
Exhiﬁw"" SPACE STATION
Microencapsulation of Drugs: New cancer therapies and improved
drug delivery derived from microgravity research.
Presented at the
th
40 Space Congress
Cape Canaveral, Florida
April 30, 2003
Microcapsules containing anti-tumor drugs made 011 188
Authored
By
Dennis R. Morrison, Ph.D. & Ruwaida S. Haddad, Ph.D.,
Code SJ/ Biological Systems Ofﬁce
NASA —J0hnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 77058

"
"2","' a * m- - 5;. .. _. 'F
kl l I ""- -W I — I :1” hlﬂJ-m: ‘ — . --. 1‘P-I;It
f . . .. _ I if .-.- - .J._...I.._ﬁ . .
i _ [I . _J' . ”_____ ?_“T I: . ' ' '--— II”, . ! ..
_ 1-. . ﬁsh. a... I | I .
' A” i ,4? ' r jﬂi E‘F""?
_ - f . "":W' :""""!':'- - 1 $1.22.?"" 1.
u ,..-* -‘. III
Dr. Chiaki Mukai making anti-tumor microcapsule Dr. Yuri Onyenfrenko training for MEPS
in Space on STS-95 (1998) experiments on 188 Mission UF-l
Abstract
New cancer therapies and improved drug delivery derived from
microgravity research.
Experiments on the 188 include encapsulation of several different anti-cancer drugs, magnetic triggering
particles, and encapsulation of genetically engineered DNA. Eight experiments, using the MEPS-II
apparatus, were conducted to study the limitations of the ﬂuid shear and g- dependent forces. These
studies included: 1) formation of anti-tumor microcapsules containing drugs for “Chemoembolization” 0f
vascularized tumors, 2) formation of microcapsules containing a photo—activated drug which can be used
for Photo Dynamic Therapy of solid tumors by activation with near infrared light (630 nm), 3) c0-
encapsulation of magnetic trigger particles and anti-tumor drugs, and 4) encapsulation of plasmid DNA.
The Microencapsulation Electrostatic Processing System (MEPS-II) is an automated apparatus modiﬁed
for use in the 188 Express Rack. The process brings together two immiscible liquids, restricting ﬂuid
shear t0 permitting surface tension forces to predominate at the interface of the ﬂuids. Microcapsules
were recovered from all 8 experiments and are currently being analyzed for size distribution and drug
content. SiX NASA Patents have issued from the space research and several more are pending. The
preliminary results from the Increment 5 - UF-2 experiments have provided new insight into the best
formulations and conditions required to produce microcapsules of different drugs, esp. special capsules
containing diagnostic imaging materials and triggered release particles. Co-encapsulation of multiple
drugs and Photodynamic Therapy (PDT) drugs has enabled new engineering strategies for production of
microcapsules on Earth designed for direct delivery into cancer tissues. Other microcapsules have now
been made for treatment of deep tissue infections, clotting disorders, and to provide delivery of genetic
engineered materials for potential gene therapy approaches. The MEPS-II apparatus remains in the ISS
awaiting microencapsulation experiments to be conducted in micro—g, and returned to Earth for analysis.
Microgravity Encapsulation of Drugs & Radiocontrast Medium
Microgravity research has provided a new under-standing of mechanisms of ﬂuid mechanics, interfacial
behavior, and biological processing methods that are compromised by gravity-dependent phenomena.
Multi-layered, liquid microcapsules can be made in a single step by slowly bringing two immiscible
liquids (of different densities) together under conditions where the surface tension and diffusive forces are
greater than the convective forces. The mechanisms of spontaneous formation of large (5 - 300 um)
microcapsules from oil, water, and hydrocarbon solvents has been studied in micro—g to develop new
methods to make these unique microcapsules on Earth.

"
"3","Antitumor Microcapsules - a new drug delivery system for treating solid tumors.
Multilayered microcapsules have been made that resemble miniature liquid-ﬁlled balloons, containing
dissolved drugs and a radio—contrast oil. Microcapsules formed in microgravity are designed for
“chemoembolization” of solid Without the usual side effects of systemic chemotherapy.
Chemoembolization of a splenic tumor is illustrated, wherein, microcapsules containing Cis-Platin or
Floxuridine anti-tumor drug are released from a catheter into the splenic artery.
. Splanic Artery
_ . _ 1 ' '1. ' it __
' I I‘ll- Emmy...- - l‘
I: ‘L it Siam\
.1.‘ .gl’ . '_ g
. .4“ v- 11 f! 3'."" ""iiai
II—T . 1M 1,, ”IT; Splani: Tunnr
_""., Iiht13”- 1' {I.-
"" ' 1 l. . JH- , Miurncapﬁulasinjantadintn
TI 1 Eplmtc artery feuding
M”? ‘ spinnictumnr
The microcapsules are carried in the blood ﬂow into the small arterioles Within the tumor wherein they
pack tightly to form an artiﬁcial emboli. The microcapsules kill the tumor cells by reducing the blood
ﬂow Within the tumor tissues, and releasing the antitumor drug slowly through the permeable outer
“skin”. Until recently, these new microcapsules could only be formed under microgravity conditions.
However, after several Shuttle ﬂights, special formulations and apparatus have been developed that now
enable microcapsule production on Earth.
Continuing product development includes microgravity experiments for optimizing drug loading, size
distributions, and various scale-up production methods. Studies at the Texas A&M College of Veterinary
Medicine are optimizing the C-T scanning of the microcapsules in rabbit kidneys as a model for 3-D
imaging in the target tumors.
\L .1; L "" -
I.“ x a
x _ Q
. ﬁ 1 z""; . ""\ ‘
X- ray of microcapsules packed into renal artery and embolized in the central half of the rabbit kidney
[~ 2-3 cm. In length]
Multi le Dru Microca sules
Multiple drugs can be co—encapsulated in the same microcapsule, but are released at different rates Within
the tissues. This provides opportunities for new, multiple drug delivery if using the special microcapsules.

"
"4","Example includes: a) two types of cytotoxic agents Which inhibit tumor cell replication, b) a cytotoxic
drug (Floxuridine) and a photo-actived drug Which releases free radicals to destroy cells lining the blood
vessels Within the tumor, 0) a cytotoxic drug (Cis-Platin) Which kills the tumor cells, combined With an
immune stimulant ( Levamisole) that recruits White blood cells to attack the tumor cells.
Photodynamic Drug Activation and Stimulation of Cellular Repair
Special microcapsules also are made containing photo—activated drug, PhotofrinTM 0r Benzo—porphyrin
derivative (BPD), Which can be used for Photo Dynamic Therapy of solid tumors by activation With near
infrared light (630 nm). Other applications of Near-Infrared (NIR) light include the ability to: 1) Increase
the rate of tissue repair of open epidermal and connective tissue wounds, 2), Treat severe mouth ulcers in
immunologically compromised children following radiotherapy, 3) Treat superﬁcial cuts and severe
abrasions, in submariners, and 4) Increase the rate of bone regeneration surrounding dental implants. The
NIR light can penetrate 5-8 inches of tissue to activate cell mechanisms or PDT drugs, Without causing
local heating of the adj acent tissues.
Fluorescent PhotofrinTM PDT Microcapsules made in space
NASA also has a current interest in microgravity-induced alterations of cellular mechanisms of wound
healing esp. those Which may involve tissue repair following traumatic injuries, compound fractures, and
infections. NASA researchers are evaluating NIR light therapy as a potential countermeasure on long
term space missions and for remote medical care on Earth. Current studies include cellular mechanisms
of combined effects of radioprotectants, cytokine inducers, and model microgravity effects on various
immune cell functions using the horizontal rotating bioreactors.
Microencapsulation of cells and cell— aggregates {spheroids}.
Single cells or cell-aggregates can be encapsulated for the purpose of transplantation to provide the
following: a) secretion of speciﬁc agents such as hormones 0r cytokines, b) reformation of bone 0)
initiation of nerve tissues annealing.
‘ I-
- . v . .1
.n I I. Ii
. ._ 0
Kidney [BHK 21], single cells encapsulated using NASA proprietary methods (20X )

"
"5","Different agents can be co-encapsulated in the same microcapsules along With cells or cell-aggregates to
study molecular mechanisms that inhibit the immune cytotoxic response.
. * ___ _‘
. ' l- . - I I - r - 1.. ’-
‘ .' ""III- . Iii; I I . k
""r 1"". 1 ‘1'; l? 1'
i; .1: 3. P +_ _.
_ 1 ‘ _ - - '
* i '5 1 _
_ n. F n: u- '- F
. * ': ‘5"". _ :""
.. 4 . 3‘5.
_ . . j I-
Kidney [BHK 21], single cells encapsulated in Alginate, and cultured for 7 days. (20X )
External Triggered gE-T) Microcapsules
A special purpose microcapsule system has been developed to lyses open the capsules upon the
application of a harmless external magnetic or ultrasonic ﬁeld. This allows for burst release of the drugs
inside and collapse of the microcapsules When the physicians decide that the slow drug release by
diffusion through the outer wall is no longer desired. The External-Triggered (E-T) microcapsules are
made so that each one contains tiny ferromagnetic particles designed to heat up in a magnetic ﬁeld. The
“trigger particles” become just hot enough to melt a hole in the outer skin thus releasing the contents of
the microcapsule upon command. The E—T Microcapsules are designed to be triggered by diagnostic
levels of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) ﬁelds long after the microcapsules have been injected into
the tissue. Current research also includes uses of ultrasonic imaging catheters and drug releasing
mechanisms.
External Trigger Particles :
inside capsules
ﬂ” '

"
"6","Tablel. Different drugs and cells encapsulated in space, on earth, and their uses.
Mieroeapsules Encapsulated Methods of Therapeutic
Made in space: Drug/ Cells Administration Use
Single Drugs Cis— Platin Intra-Arterial Injection Chemoembolize Tumors
Urokinase I.V. Injection Dissolve Blood Clots
Amoxicillin I.V. and Tropical Resistant Infections
Ciproﬂoxaein I.V. or Inhalation Inhaled microbial spores
Doxcycline I.V. or Inhalation Inhaled microbial spores
Reglan Intra— Nasal Microbial vaccines
DNA -(baeterial) Transfection Anti-Nausea, Astronauts
Dual Cis—Platin + Floxuridine Intra-Arterial injection Ovarian, bladder, & liver
Chemotherapy tumors
Drugs: Floxuridine + Levamisole Intra-Arterial injection C010“ carcinoma
(immunostimulant)
Photofrin + Floxuridine Intra-Arterial injection Esophageal & stomach
BPD-Photodynamie drug cancer
Additional Single cells Transplantation Local secretion of
Microcapsule cytokines and Interferons—oc
made on Earth Cell-aggregates Transplantation Local secretion 0f cell
Spheroids growth factors
Micro ravi O timize formulas, ﬂuid ﬂow rates,tem erature O timize roduction rocess
& deposition of Ancillary Coatings targeted therapy
Current Space Experiments:
In order to expand the space research, a special Mieroencapsulation and Electrostatic Processing System
(MEPS) was designed and ﬂown on STS-95. Three sets of experiments compared the encapsulation
efﬁciencies comparing the MEPS, the DMDA type apparatus [ITA, Ine., Exton, PA], and a specially
modiﬁed ADSEP system [SHOT, Ine., Greenville, IN]. The results of the STS-95 experiments showed
that each of the three apparatus had unique advantages depending on the type of experiments. The MEPS
showed great promise for space experiments designed understand the limitations of ﬂuid shear, pressure
& temperature in seale-up and ground-based commercial production. Therefore, NASA assembled a
team to construct a second version of the MEPS [MEPS-II] Which was designed speciﬁcally to operate in
the ISS. _
.. r . _ I
. . -. 1: «=1. - ' I‘- ; _'. a F#- _' ' J
n u- ._.. H n.
1- .1 . /""1.~I1'I{ * 4i.-
_ 5i €34, w {L.-
L I 1, ., _. .- ~.--—-"" ~.
Sen. J ohn Glenn conducting microcapsule experiments in ADSEP (STS-95)

"
"7","MEPS—II Apparatus Flown 0n the ISS
The revised Microencapsulation Electrostatic Processing System (MEPS-II) was built to occupy one-half
of an Express Rack locker, including rear-air cooling and an improved crew display speciﬁcally for
research in the International Space Station and Shuttle Middeck. The MEPS-II was ﬁrst ﬂown on UF-1
[NOV. 2001], but experiment modules were not ﬂown, so the unit was returned for further testing.
_ : widen Display
- 3 I Mnnitur
_ - -.—. fl; -=~— ~Ei;;;5i§.—}t-,__;..g_-‘_=‘ff;r . _
5‘: """"-' I. . h:_.*‘__._.=_=£# - . I HI I 1 ﬂ - h Cuntml
“$11 -.;:| I h
3.?in.diameter:-:1Einlung FEM E «5 _'- LJ— -_ . v '
cnntains une mmplete experiment __ ”3'“ _ .5 ' - _ ' ' i
that is stuwed separatelythen installed _"" ., ""+13; ""- _"" - _' -_
intn MEPS I: 5 minute prunedure]. 1, : .J, JI '1. J 1: __ _.n=; ._5|
'” ‘ 1—1 Stuwed
- gm "" PCM'S
ISS- Increment 5 Experiments The ﬁrst microencapsulation experiments conducted on the
International Space Station were launched in June 2002 on the UF-2 Mission. The experiments were
conducted by Dr. Peggy Whitson in July during Increment 5 operations. The Process Chamber Modules
were returned on STS-111 in November 2002.
Eight experiments, using the MEPS-II were conducted during the Increment 5 mission. The main research
focus was to repeat experiments conducted on STS-95 to better understand the limitations of the ﬂuid
ﬂows and g- dependent forces during the microencapsulation process. These studies included: 1)
formation of anti-tumor micro—capsules containing drugs for “Chemoembolization” 0f vascularized
tumors, 2) formation of microcapsules containing a photo—activated drug which can be used for Photo
Dynamic Therapy of solid tumors by activation with near infrared light (630 nm), 3) co-encapsulation of
magnetic trigger particles and anti-tumor drugs, and 4) encapsulation of plasmid DNA. The following
drugs were encapsulated using three operating processes: 1) Cis—Platinum (cytotoxic drug), 2)
Floxuridine (cytotoxic drug),
3) Benzoporphyrin derivative (BPD) - photoactivated drug, which destroys tumor, cells upon exposure to
near infrared light [provided by QLT, Inc.].
In two of the four BPD experiments, both liquid drug and crystals of BPD were found many of the
microcapsules. Microcapsule sizes ranged from 3 to 95 um [ Note: diameter> 22 um is optimal for
chemoembolization applications in cancer therapy].

"
"8","NASA JSC JD.R. Morrison
I ' -
. O O
“

Microcapsule with crystal of BPD .

gﬁgindiﬁmc Therapy Drug prowded by Microcapsule with two crystals of BPD

’ ' [Photodynamic Therapy Drug providedby
QLT,Inc.]

Run 5, Texas A & M experiment encapsulating genetic engineered DNA, had the greatest yield of
capsules ranging from 2 to 20 um in diameter. Dr. Allison Ficht (TAMU) is analyzing samples of
microcapsules containing the DNA.

Runs 6 & 7 encapsulated two anti-tumor drugs, Cis-Platinum & 5-FU along with magnetic trigger
particles. The size range was from 2 to 47 um, the yield was good, and the encapsulation of the trigger
particles was better than those made 011 STS—95.

During Run 8 — one valve did not open, thus microcapsules were not produced containing the prime
polymer as a component of the outer skin, however, microcapsules were produced from the coating
polymer during the electrostatic process [used normally to change the surface charge of microcapsules for
targeting purposes].

NASA -JSC 1D.R. Morrison
Microcapsules of Cis—Platinum & Fluorouracil . '
m «a ‘1. "" 5— It ; - I
p I -f. r t, 37: \1’ i if _ _ 1
; x y, , o"" t» ‘ :1 \Q -.
"" 01:15? -. j *7 “W "" _
[Commercial Partner - Ctitical Care Innovations, Inc., Chantilly, VA]

"
"9","Technology Transfer
Microencapsulation experiments on the 188 are providing new information to improve manufacturing and
scale-up production for clinical trials and new therapeutic uses. NASA has obtained ﬁve US Patents 0n
the microcapsules, the manufacturing process, and production apparatus. Three other related patents are
pending. Critical Care Innovations, Inc., (Chantilly, VA) has licensed portions of this technology to
combine with their Ultrasound catheter and imaging systems to develop a new method of precision
delivery of anti- cancer drugs directly into solid tumors. IRI (Houston, TX) and NASA-JSC are
collaborating with the new Center for Microencapsulation and Drug Delivery at Texas A&M University
to develop new applications for the microcapsules and to optimize microcapsule production for
commercial manufacturing and marketing.
1'??? .1’ "" r-f-‘r? ""EE'F- . - -
fig, “$53 '..f.=$
E _:.- -1:- . 1; .1 ;‘.-:- ‘=._._.."".';
'- .. ,Laﬁem-<*
""6‘49 -' 502$ iiﬁ-‘iihwiff
‘6 1?? Ta? ‘ t '3'...
re. 3- - 9.5.3: -
3;, -. £13 33:111—3526‘1‘:
[i = - 93? a; .5 .gr ﬁgﬁﬂ
I: *_ -. 15"" - '_1'.u-?#n‘u‘.-l""* .9:
Microcapsule containing cis-Platin and Floxuridine. . . .ﬂuorescence from drug inside (yellow) Microencapusles containing bacterial DNA
Run 7 ISS-UF-Z (J SC/CCI/IRI) Dr. Allison Ficht, & Dr. Frank Little, TAMU
This new microcapsule technology presents numerous opportunities for collaborations to develop new
drug delivery systems for selected medical therapies. Product development is focused on tissue culture,
animal studies and clinical trials using Earth-based scale-up and production technology. However, for
selected projects some space ﬂight experiment opportunities also are available Via the NASA Biological
Systems Ofﬁce and commercial Space Product Development programs.

Reference Publications/ Scientiﬁc Presentations:

1. D. R. Morrison, B. Mosier, and J . M. Cassanto, Microencapsulation 0f Anti-tumor, Antibiotic and Thrombolytic
Drugs in Microgravity, Proceedings of the Technology 2003 Conference on National Technology Transfer,
Anaheim, CA, Dec. 7, 1993, NASA Publication CP-3249, pp.117-126, 1994

2. D. R. Morrison, B. Mosier, and J . M. Cassanto, Immiscible-phase Microencapsulation of Drugs in Microgravity,
in R.A. Schiffman & J .B. Andrews, Eds, 6th International Symposium on Experimental Methods for Microgravity
Materials Sciences, published by Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, Warrendale, PA, pp 199-207, 1994

3. D. R. Morrison and B. Mosier, Microencapsulation of Drugs in Microgravity: A New Drug Delivery System for
Chemoembolization of Vascular Tumors. Paper # 95-LS-39, NASA/AIAA, Life Sciences and Space Medicine
Conference, Houston, TX, April 3-6, 1995.

4. B. M. Mosier, and D. R. Morrison, Multi-lamellar Microcapsules Created in Microgravity for Dual Drug
Chemoembolization. Proceedings of the International Symposium Controlled Release of Bioactive Material,
22:180-181,1995

5. Farmer, Linda. NASA Launches Monoglycerides into Space. Inside Eastman (Tennessee Division), V0115 N0.14:4,
July 18, 1996.

6. J .M. Cassanto and BM. Mosier, New Methods for Space Processing Research; The Dual Material
Dispersion Apparatus: A Second Generation Automated Microgravity Processing Laboratory. Low G,

Vol.8 No. 3, September 1997.

7. D. R. Morrison, B. Mosier, and J . M. Cassanto, Low Shear Encapsulation of Multiple Drugs.

Low G, Vol.9 No. 1:19-22, March 1998.

"
