"","x"
"1","Journal of Biological Regulators and Homeostatic Agents
Space flight effects on bacterial physmlogy
N.M.E.J. LEYS, L. HENDRICKX, P. DE BOEVER, S. BAATOUI M. MERGEAY
Laboratory for Microbiology and Radiobiology, Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK-CEN), Mol, Belgium
ABSTRACT: The study of bacterial behavior under space flight conditions is highly important for the early detection of
changes in bacterial communities and bacteria with medical, environmental, or life support consequences for survival
of the crew in closed space environments. Although many species of prokaryotes have been studied in ground
simulation facilities or have been flown in space flights, at present only few hard research data are available to predict
the effects of cosmic radiation, microgravity, vibration and hypervelocity on microbial behavior in space flight. The
results that are available tend to be fragmentary and often lack a classical, controlled experimental context to interpret
them. Thus, many basic questions concerning the effects of space on microbial behavior have yet to be resolved. (J
Biol Regul Homeost Agents 2004; 18: 193-9)
KEY WORDS: Bacteria, Space flight, Growth, Physiology, Gene expression
Received: May 15, 2004
Accepted: June 26, 2004

INTRODUCTION THE STUDY OF SPACE FLIGHT EFFECTS

ON BACTERIAL PHYSIOLOGY

Human exploration of hostile environments (deep-
sea, arctic or desert regions, space) has implicated Despite the fact that a lot of investigations on the
the development of isolated seIf-sustaining confined behavior of micro-organisms in space conditions have
habitats (submarine vehicles, arctic or desert stations, been carried out, public accessible publications on the
space vehicles and stations and future planetary subject are however rare.
bases) with the purpose to harbor humans over Two kinds of experiments can be distinguished: (a)
extended periods. Recycling of waste and the ground experiments simulating spaceflight related
production of food in these confined environments will environmental conditions, or (b) spaceflight expe-
be of paramount importance and therefore microbial riments in space stations such as MIR (an, which
based life support systems are under development (1, can mean either “world” or “peace” in Russian) or ISS
2). However, pathogenic and opportunistic pathogenic (International Space Station).
bacteria may also jeopardize the well-being of the
crew in these confined environments. The Closed
habitat hardware may be compromised when the BACTERIAL GROUND EXPERIMENTS
material is contaminated by bacteria that have MIMICKING SPACE FLIGHT CONDITIONS
biodegradative and biocorrosive capacities.

It is important to study the behavior of microbial Relatively infrequent flight opportunities and
populations in Closed environments in order to limitations related to space missions such as limited
estimate their real impact. In this respect, the availability of electrical power, stowage space, crew
spacecraft environment forms a special ecological time and a general lack of sophisticated analytical
niche where parameters such as acceleration, gravity, equipment and expertise onboard the space craft
radiation, and electromagnetism are completely make earth-based experiments mimicking space flight
different than on earth. As it is well known that conditions essential. These ground experiments make
environmental stresses induce and select for it possible to relate bacterial responses to single
physiological, metabolic and/or genetic variations in stress parameters (acceleration, vibration, radiation,
micro—organisms, it is envisioned that such adaptations gravitation, etc.).
will also likely occur under spaceflight conditions. The Irradiation experiments can be done using single
study of bacterial activity under space flight conditions type beams mimicking the separate ranges from the
is therefore highly important for the early detection of wide cosmic radiation spectrum. However, it is not
Changes in bacterial communities and bacteria linked correct to assume that the accumulation of these
to medical, environmental, orlife support issues. spectra will allow us to predict the total biological

©Wichtig Editore, 2004 O393-974X/193-07 $15.00

"
"2","Bacterial response to space flight
effects of complex cosmic radiation. The space of microgravity on gene expression related to
radiation simulator “CERN-EU high energy virulence and pathogenicity It has been shown using
Reference Field (CERF)” facility, based in a positive CDNA selection method that S. enterica
Switzerland, studies the effects of the total cosmic serovar typhimurium cultured under simulated
radiation spectrum (Mitaroff et al 2002). The CERF is microgravity conditions exhibited significant
a reference base for testing, comparing and differences in protein synthesis and showed
calibrating passive and active instruments before enhanced virulence in a murine Challenged model (5,
their use on board aircraft and in space. NASA has 8). The cells grown in the Clinostat were also more
constructed a space radiation laboratory dedicated resistant to acid stress and macrophage killing. DNA-
to radiobiologioal research at the Brookhaven microarrays elucidated the differential expression of
National Laboratory (BNL) in New York (USA). The Circa 163 genes distributed throughout the
facility that was opened in 2003 employs beams of Chromosome of S. enterica serovar thyphimurium
heavy ions extracted from Brookhaven’s Booster when the latter was grown in liquid medium under
accelerator. However, it is difficult to get access to simulated microgravity (7). These genes were often
these kinds of facilities and mostly they are not organized in Clusters or operons and represented
equipped for microbial experiments. Currently there functionally diverse groups. Also multiple differences
are no reports available using these facilities to were observed in the total protein and immuno-
study the bacterial response to space flight radiation reactive protein profiles of S. pneumoniae grown in
conditions. simulated microgravity (17). However, for 8.
By far the most studied space flight parameter pneumoniae there was no evidence for significant
simulated in ground experiments is microgravity. The differences in the production of virulence products
“Clinostat” is a rotating bioreaotor generally used in such as pneumolysin (17).
laboratories for three-dimensional eukaryotio tissue
culturing under microgravity conditions (4) but has
also found applications in the field of microbiology (5- BACTERIAL SPACE FLIGHT EXPERIMENTS
8). The Rotating Wall Vessel (RWV) or High Aspect IN SIDE SPACECRAFTS
Rotating Vessel (HARV), is an optimized Clinostat
designed at the NASA Johnson Space Centre Although costly and much more difficult in design
(Houston, Texas, USA) in an effort to model cellular and operation, only space flight experiments in
response to the microgravity environment (9, 10). A pressurized space habitats can study the synergetio
Clinostat is a rotating bioreaotor that mimics the effects of microgravity and higher cosmic radiation
conditions of weightlessness for microbes by growing dose.
them inside a slowly rotating liquid-filled Chamber that
creates a sustained low-shear (<1 dyn/Cm2) and low- Space flight effects on bacterial survival and growth
disturbance environment for cell growth. The rotation characteristics
of the liquid counteracts the slow sedimentation of the
cells, thereby creating a constant “free-fall” of the cells The effects of microgravity during pressurized
through the culture medium. The production of space flight on bacteria have been mainly studied by
antibiotics gramicidin S by Bacillus brevis and post flight assessment of growth and survival of
miorooin B17 by Escherichia coli ZK650 was inhibited, bacterial cultures. Observations from microbial flight
although the test strains grew faster in the simulated experiments are variable. Most studies using for
microgravity conditions compared to in normal gravity example Gram-negative Escherichia coli and Salmonella
conditions (11-16). However, in a Clinostat, cells feel a typhimurium or gram-positive Streptomyces levoris
slight sheer as they move through the liquid — a and Bacillus subtilis report a significant increase in the
difference from true weightlessness that could affect growth of planktonio cultures in space flight
their behavior. The differences in shear stress environment. Liquid space flight cultures grew with
produced in the rotating bioreactor compared to static apparently shorter lag periods and apparently
or shaken incubators, may play a role in the increased growth rates during comparable
extracellular production of antibiotics. Using micro- exponential growth periods to higher final cell
arrays based on whole-genome sequences, E. coli concentrations (18-24). Although the autolysis curves
cells grown in the rotating bioreactor have been found of both E. coli and B. subtilis began at higher cell
to express over 100 open reading frames, few densities in space flight cultures than in ground
Clustered in likely operons, at levels that are more cultures, the rate of autolysis in the stationary phase
than twice or less than half what is seen in a flask in the 2 types of cultures was identical (24).
control (6). The growth in the Clinostat seemed to Methylobacterium organophilum strain MB-67 showed
mainly affect the way in which the E. coli cells interact the tendency to grow anaerobically in space (Salyut 6
with their environment rather than affecting core Mission, September 1977, USSR) (16). However, the
cellular functions (6). Salmonella enterica serovar growth Characteristics of methanogenio bacteria
typhimurium and Streptococcus pneumoniae have Methylosinus sp. strain AB-21 and Methylomonas
been grown in rotating bioreaotors to study the effects methanica strain AB-3 (Salyut 6 Mission, September
194

"
"3","Leys et al
{£322. .. ‘
., ...__-'f+ 2‘- ..-"" I 1: ..‘l‘i‘: -* Eel"" ‘
Wt ' -ri :12. .. "" ..aiiri“ xi ___. W5... "" é-LU
h _,___ 4.3.; f""? ff: -. .. 1 - .._..- ‘ 14-1 5% _- - . L- {:25 .1... 1%.- v ”:14“ ﬂ
1""? A ETA 5.1-“ ""‘3 I ”4!. \«ﬂ T I. ' ‘ "" ’. . w .\
/% ﬂea. Hr «E:~;;~;.- 1' -'..-..--':-_, i.- . ﬁ 72;».
H2"" m?“ .---'.‘.t‘i1::3;:::.-... ”J“ "" ' ' ""'
r 5.11"" ;_-...-_' _- u. 9 "".;--:_¢:;‘,., _' _-_._... __ .___ -_
-' :3. 133‘: .9: . :5 3 ﬂ. xtﬁ'3-31'.-~. Er
Jr'j}, 5*: ”_‘f'i. 3; ff"": '
:ir- . ' I: .9-“ J_- . v arr. -_
Fig. 1 - The former Russian MIR space station (1986-2001) (A) and the current International Space Station, a collaboration of 16
countries from all over the world (2000 - ?) (B).
1977, USSR), Clostridum butyricum or Escherichia suggest that the unique fluid quiescence in the
coli were not influenced when grown under space microgravity environment (lack of sedimentation,
flight conditions (16, 25). Also a Chinese research creating unique transfer of nutrients and waste
group concluded that the major morphological and products), is responsible for the enhanced bacterial
physiological Characteristics of two purple nonsulphur proliferation in liquid suspensions in space flight (29).
photosynthetic bacteria, i.e., Rhodopseudomonas On solid medium or surfaces, it has been observed
polustris H3 and Rhodobacter sphaeroides ZGY, were that the numbers of attached cells in biofilms grown in
unchanged after space flight on a satellite for 15 days microgravity were several times greater than in Earth-
(26). based parallel experiments (BIORACK experiment,
A serious drawback in most of these studies was Atlantis Shuttle Mission STS-81, January 1997) (30).
the lack of on board controls that could be used to Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO-1 was able to
rule out the additional effect of vibration and startforming biofilms at 22°C in flight on black 0.2 pm
acceleration in flight compared to ground incubation. It pore size polycarbonate membranes that mainly
is not easy to identify the factor that could be decisive consisted of viable actively motile cells and that
in the reported observations. This drawback was persisted in spite of vigorous agitation (ITA type III
partially overcome with the use of the European osmotic dewatering device, Space Discovery Shuttle
Space Agency’s BIORACK facility, which included an Mission STS-95, October 1998) (31). However, there
inoubator-centrifuge that could be used in flight to was no discernible visible difference with fluorescent
simulate 19 Earth gravity (27, 28). Using the scanning confocal microscopy in the morphology of
BIORACK facility, it was confirmed that Bacillus the miorogravity-grown biofilm as compared to
subtilis suspension cultures grown in space flight biofilms formed under conditions of full gravity. The
microgravity had an increased growth rate and total experimental protocol used did not discern any
biomass yield (28) compared to cultures grown in influence of microgravity on biofilm structure or
space under 19. physiology.
Most of these space flight growth experiments were
performed in liquid cultures; only few were performed Space flight effects on bacterial stress resistance
on semi-solid or solid media (20, 21). Space flight
experiments, in conjunction with static, rotation and Space flight could have effects on general known
agitation ground control experiments, indicate that E. bacterial resistance to growth condition stresses
coli and B. subtilis cultures on agar, unlike their (temperature, aeration, moisture, osmotic pressure,
suspension grown counterparts, do not experience pressure, etc.) or genotoxio agents (antibiotics (AB),
heightened final cell concentration when the inertial radiation, volatile or soluble Chemicals, heavy metals,
environment is changed. These findings point to fluid etc.) However, the conditions of launching and space
dynamics and extra cellular transport phenomena and flight may also be considered as a “stress situation”
not cellular dynamics as the most likely cause of (vibration, acceleration, microgravity, cosmic radiation,
previously reported increases in bacterial growth in special internal physioo-Chemioal conditions of space
liquid cultures in microgravity (20). Additional studies vehicles and stations, etc.). The bacteria may develop
195

"
"4","Bacterial response to space flight
or express very specific space flight stress responses. - Space fligth effect on cell wall and cytoskeleton
Changes in bacterial stress responses due to space structure
flight were mainly assessed by post-flight analysis of The direct effects of microgravity during space flight
the cell physiology and gene expression. on bacterial physiology have also been studied using
electron microscopy but revealed no Changes in
- Space flight effects on resistance to growth cytoskeleton ultra-struoture (16). In the two MESSAGE
conditions stresses experiments (Microbial Experiments in the Space
The SIGNAL experiment showed that at least one Station About Gene Expression) flow cytometry was
system of signal transduction across the Escherichia used for the first time to directly study post flight the
coli envelope that is involved in osmoregulation is physiology of bacteria grown during 10-days in the ISS
functional and induced a growth, at least as well or (MESSAGE 1 experiment, Odissea Mission, Belgian
even better, in liquid cultures in conditions of space Taxi Flight, Soyuz 6, November 2002, ESA)(MESSAGE
flight microgravity (BIORACK facility, Shuttle Columbia 2 experiment, Cervantes Mission, Spanish Soyuz
Mission STS-65, July 1994) (32). Signal transduction Mission, Soyuz 8, October 2003, ESA) (41-43).
pathways across biological membranes ensure Bacterial physiology of space cultures were analyzed
communication between the cell and its environment, post-flight and using f|ow-Cytometry, electron-
a||owing the cell to adjust its pattern of gene microscopy and Raman spectrometry and coupled with
expression as a function of Changes in the proteomic and transoriptomio analysis of pure strain
surrounding medium. ground and space flight control cultures. The
MESSAGE experiments were the first ones to analyze
- Space flight effects on resistance to genotoxic bacterial gene expression in space flight cultures and to
agents link it to physiological observations. A ground control
Some studies report increased resistance of bacteria experiment was inoculated at the same time and
such as Staphylococcus aureus and Eschericia coli to maintained at identical conditions parallel in time. As
higher minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of model bacteria Ralstonia metallidurans CH34 (ATCC
antibiotics such as oxaoillin, chloramphenicol, 43123) (44, 45), a flexible, versatile and robust we||-
erythromycin, oolistin and kanamyoin (CYTOS 2 studied non-pathogenio [3-Proteobaoterium which can
experiment, Salyut 7 mission, July 1982, France/ survive in harsh environmental conditions, and
USSR; ANTIBIO experiment, Spaoelab D-1 facility, Rhodospirillum rubrum S1H (ATCC25903) (2), a motile
Space Shuttle Discovery mission, 1985, France/USA) spiral shaped a-Proteobacterium colonizing the second
(33-38). The MIC was sometimes even Changed by a bioreaotor of the future life support system MELiSSA,
factor 2. A Chinese research group found however that were used. Both bacteria were grown in liquid medium
the AB-resistanoe of 2 purple nonsulphur photo- or as spots on agar in hermetically sealed 10 cm petri
synthetic bacteria, i.e., Rhodopseudomonas polustris dishes and incubated for 10 days at room temperature
H3 and Rhodobacter sphaeroides ZGY, was not in the Service Module of the ISS. Cells grown in space
Changed after space flight on a satellite for 15 days flight and on ground were analyzed post-flight. The
(26). In case of increased resistance after short-term differences in bacterial physiology observed between
exposure to microgravity, the resistance was quickly space and ground cultures in a first MESSAGE 1
lost upon return to Earth (39). The tentative conclusion experiment, were not observed in a more stable
at present is that space flight may increase the required temperature controlled second space experiment
MIC for several organisms, possibly by stimulating MESSAGE 2, indicating that pre-, in- and post-flight
microbial growth or by inducing physiological or storage conditions of space samples can have an
biochemical Changes in ceII-wall structure of important effect on analysis results. The MESSAGE
permeability (16, 40). In contrast to the reports from experiments led to a unique view on the molecular and
short-term space flights, the long-term exposure (on the physiological response of a whole organism to the
agar slants, at room temperature, 4 months, MIR specific growth condition of space. Recently, bacterial
Space Station) could cause bacteria to become more cell physiology was also studied in the spaceflight
susceptible to most, but not all, antibiotics (Fluid experiment MOBILIZATION/ PLASMIDA, (RECOMB-K
Processing Apparatus FPA facility, To: Atlantis Space facility, DELTA mission, April 2004, Soyuz 9, ESA/RKA).
Shuttle mission STS-86, September 1997, Return: The aim of the experiment was to compare gene
Endeavour Space Shuttle mission STS-86, January transfer in microgravity (space flight) and gravity
1998) (30). However of the 4 species tested, i.e. (ground control). Specifically designed hardware
Escherichia coli ATCC 10798, Bacillus subtilis ATCC (RECOMB-K) was used for performing the mating
6051, Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 6538P and experiment with a set of Gram positive Bacillus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, each thuringiensis strains and with Gram negative
responded differently to the 12 different tested Escherichia coli and Ralstonia metallidurans. These
antibiotics. Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and different model strains were selected because the
Pseudomonas aeruginosa frequently became less mechanisms of plasmid transfer differ significantly
resistant, but Staphylococcus aureus occasionally between Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria.
became more resistant to the antibiotic. Production of tranoonjugants in the mating bacterial
196

"
"5","Leys et al
cultures and cell physiology of the mating partners was of bacteria to AB in space flight may imply that
analyzed post—flight. disinfection may be problematic. In addition, it may be
difficult to treat an illness or injury with antibiotics on
short term missions, due to the tendency of bacteria
CONCLUSIONS to resist them. On long-term missions, such as
periods spent on space stations or trips to other
In sum, at present very few hard research data are planets, it may be difficult to predict the response of
available to predict the combined effects of cosmic bacteria to a certain antibiotic. While most bacteria
radiation, microgravity, vibration and hypervelooity on seem to become more susceptible to antibiotics after
microbial behavior in space flight. Although many long-term space flight exposure, a few retain
species of prokaryotes have been studied in ground resistance, and no pattern is apparent. The pattern of
simulation facilities or have been flown in space gene expression in some microbes differs in
flights, the inconsistencies with regard to culture weightlessness, possibly leading to difference in
conditions, procedures and the use of equipment, behavior in space flight. But it is still to be elucidated
have led in some cases to conflicting results. In which genes are affected by microgravity and why
addition, the relatively infrequent flight opportunities, weightlessness should cause these Changes. Perhaps
as well as the severe constraints involved in cells sense deformations in their saCk-Iike membranes
performing experiments in space have largely and respond to that signal. That signal could be
precluded exhaustive conclusions. The absence of oueing Changes in gene expression.
gravity, which mandates the development of
specialized equipment and procedures, the
restrictions imposed on power, weight and volume, ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
and intense competition for the crew’s time during
space flights require that experiments be simple and We thank the European Space Agency (ESA-PRODEX)
easily performed with little or no crew involvement. In and the Belgian Federal Ofﬁce for Science, Technology and
addition, long term observations (more than 6 Culture (DWTC/SSTC) for the flight opportunities and the
months) with known bacterial strains are still rare. The financial support to conduct microbial space experiments
results that are available tend to be fragmentary and (PRODEX agreements No 90037 & No 90094 & No 90150).
often lack a Classical, controlled experimental context We are grateful to Christophe Lasseur and Christel Paillé,
to interpret them. Thus, many basiC questions also both from ESTEC/ESA, for constant support and
concerning the effects of space on microbial behavior advice. We thank all the collaborating Belgian laboratories
have to be resolved. and scientists such as Ruddy Wattiez (a research associate
However, in general, simulated microgravity in of the FNRS) of the Université de Mons-Haihaut (UMH),
ground-based experiments induced effects on Jacques Mahillon and Delphine Hahus of the Université
bacteria can be summarized as following: 1) altered Catholique de Louvain (UCL) and Pierre Corhélis and
production of secondary metabolites; 2) global Séverihe Aehdekerk of the Vrije UniversiteitBrussel (VUB).
alteration of gene expression induced by adaptation And finally, special thanks to the whole group of the
to simulated microgravity and; 3) sometimes Laboratory of Microbiology and Radiobiology of the Belgian
increased virulence in murine model infection. By Nuclear Research Centre for their help during the intense
watching the reaction of the cells to the new flight experiment preparation periods and the nightly
environment of suspension or microgravity, scientists analysis of space cultures immediate upon their return.
will discover more about the mechanisms that control
cell behavior. However, it remains to be proven that
microgravity rather than fluid effects causes the
observed Changes.
Concerning microbial space flight experiments, in
general one could conclude that microgravity has
been shown not to hinder bacterial growth, on the
contrary, it can enhance the growth of planktonio
bacterial cultures, possibly through its influences on
fluid dynamics. Biofilm formation can occur during
microgravity, an issue that for example must be
addressed during the design of air and water
recycling systems for long-term space flights. Various
experiments have suggested that antibiotics are less
efficient in space flight conditions. Bacteria exposed to Reprint requests to:
space flight stresses may become more resistant to Er-bir- Ntatali? L38 b_ I
antibiotics over a short, Introdootory period, while BaelggiohﬁcgarEggégrggyCemre(SCKOCEN)
|osmg most but not all of that reSIstanCe over the long Boeretang 200’ 32400 Mel, Belgium
term. For the future, this possibly Changing response Natalie.Leys@sckcen.be
197

"
"6","Bacterial response to space flight
REFERENCES

1. Mergeay M, Verstraete W, Dubertret G, et al. ‘MELiSSA’ Roming WR. Induction of lysogenic bacteria in the
A micro-organism-based model for ‘CELLS’ space environment. In: The experiments of biosatellite ||.
development. Proceedings of the 3rd European NASASP-104,eds.SaundersJW.1971:304-24.
Symposium on Space Thermal Control and Life Support 19. Klaus DM, Luttges MW, Stodieck LS. Investigation of
Systems, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 1988. space flight effects on Escherichia coli growth. SAE

2. Hendrickx L, Janssen P, Baatout S, et al. Stability and Technical Paper Series SAE 941260, 1994.
axenicity in the MELiSSA loop. Proceeding of 33rd 20. Kacena MA, Leonard PE, Todd P, Luttges MW. Low
Annual Meeting of International Conference on gravity and inertial effects on the growth of E. coli and B.
Environmental Systems (ICES): Expanding Human subtilis in semi-solid media. Aviat Space Environ Med
Boundaries Through Environmental Control. Vancouver, 1997a; 68: 1104-8.

BC, Canada, 2003. 21. Kacena MA, Todd P. Growth characteristics of E. coli

3. Mitaroff A, Silari M. The CERN-EU high-energy and B. subtilis cultured on an agar substrate in
reference field (CERF) facility for dosimetry at microgravity. Microgravity Sci Technol 1997 b; 10: 58-
commercial flight altitudes and in space. Radiation 62.

Protection Dosimetry 2002; 102: 7-22. 22. Klaus DM, Simske 8, Todd P, Stodieck LS. Investigation

4. Woods CC, Banks KE, Gruener R, Deluca D. Loss ofT of space flight effects on Escherichia coli and a
cell precursors after spaceflight and exposure to vector- proposed model of underlying physical mechanisms.
averaged gravity. FASEB J 2003; 17: 1526-8. Microbiology 1997; 143: 449-55.

5. Nickerson CA, Ott CM, Mister SJ, et al. Microgravity as 23. Kacena MA, Merrell GA, Manfredi B, et al. Bacterial
a novel environmental signal affecting Salmonella growth in space flight: Logistic growth curve parameters
enterica serovar Typhimurium virulence. Infection and for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. Appl Microbiol
Immunity 2000; 68: 3147-52. Biotechnol 1999 a; 51: 229-34.

6. Fox GE, Willson R, Pierson DL, Pellis NR, Ott CM, et al. 24. Kacena MA, Smith EE, Todd P. Autolysis of Escherichia
The effect of simulated microgravity on microbial gene coli and Bacillus subtilis cells in low gravity. Appl
expression 2002. http://www.isso.uh.edu/publications/ Microbiol Biotechnol 1999 b; 52: 437-9.
A9900/html/pdaf/fox.htm. 25. Bouloc P, D’Ari R. Escherichia coli metabolism in space.

7. Wilson JW, Ramamurthy R, Porwollik S, et al. JGenMicrobiol1991;137:2839-43.

Microarray analysis identifies Salmonella genes 26. Yang HF, Huang ZY, Zhang DM, Liu ZH. Biological
belonging to the Iow-shear modeled microgravity effects of space flight on purple nonsulphur photo-
regulon. PNAS 2002; 99: 13807-12. synthetic bacteria. Space Med Med Eng (Beijing) 1999;

8. Nickerson CA, Ott CM, Wilson JW, et al. Low-shear 12:46-50.
modelled microgravity: A global environmental 27. Mesland DAM. Biorack experiments in Spacelab D-1
regulatory signal affecting bacterial gene expression, and |ML-1: Further developments in gravitational
physiology and pathogenesis. Journal of Microbiological biology. In: Proceedings of the 3rd European
Methods 2003; 54: 1-11. Symposium on Life Sciences Research in Space. 1987;

9. Hammond TG, Hammond JM. Optimized suspension 3: 307-12.
culture: The rotating-wall vessel. Am J Physiol Renal 28. Mennigmann HD, Lang M. Growth and differentiation of
Physiol 2001: 281: F12-25. Bacillus subtilis under microgravity conditions. In:

10. Bulgher D, Chopra V, Pellis N, et al. NASA’s Bioreactor: Biorack on Spacelab D1: An overview of the first flight of
Growing cells in a microgravity environment. NASA’s Biorack, an ESA facility for life sciences research in
Educational Brief 2002. EB-2002-12-187-MSFC. microgravity, Longdon N, Noordwijk DV, eds. The

11. Fang A, Pierson DL, Koenig DW, Mishra SK, Demain Netherlands: ESA SP-1091; 1988: 37-44.

AL. Effect of simulated microgravity and shear stress on 29. Kacena MA, Manfredi B, Todd P. Effects of space flight
microcin B17 production by Escherichia coli and on its and mixing on bacterial growth in low volume cultures.
excretion into the medium. Appl Environ Microbiol 1997 Microgravity Sci Technol 2000; XII.

a; 63:4090-2. 30. Pyle B, Vasques M, Aquilina R. The effect of micro-

12. Fang A, Pierson DL, Mishra SK, Koenig DW, Demain AL gravity on the smallest space travelers. Bacterial
Gramicidin 8 production by Bacillus brevis in simulated physiology and virulence on earth an in microgravity;
microgravity. Curr Microbiol 1997 b; 34: 199-204. 1982. National Aeronautics and Space Administration

13. Fang A, Pierson DL, Mishra SK, Koenig DW, Demain (NASA)2003.

AL. Secondary metabolism in simulated microgravity: 31 McLean RJC, Cassanto JM, Barnes MB, Koo JH.
Beta-Iactam production by Streptomyces clavuligerus. J Bacterial biofilm formation under microgravity con-
Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 1997 c; 18: 22-5. ditions. FEMS Microbiology Letters 2001; 195: 115-9.

14. Fang A, Pierson DL, Mishra SK, Demain AL. Growth of 32. Thévenet D, D’Ari R, Bouloc P. The SIGNAL experiment
Streptomyces hygroscopicus in rotating-wall bioreactor in BIORACK: Escherichia coli in microgravity. Journal of
under simulated microgravity inhibits rapamycin Biotechnology1996;47:89-97.
production.App| Microbiol Biotechnol 2000 a; 54: 33-6. 33. Tixador R, Richoilley G, Raffin J, et al. The CYTOS

15. Fang A, Pierson DL, Mishra SK, Demain AL. Relief from biological experiments carried out on the Soviet orbital
glucose interference in microcin B17 biosynthesis by station SALYUT 6.Aviat Space Environ Med 1981; 52.
growth in a rotating-wall bioreactor. Lett Appl Microbiol 34. Planel H, Tixador R, Nefedov Y, Gretchko G, Richoilley
2000 b; 31: 39-41. G. Effects of space flight factors at the cellular level:

16. Pierson DL, Mishra SK. Space flight, effects on Results of the CYTOS experiments.AviatSpace Environ
microorganisms. In: Lederberg V, ed. Encyclopedia of Med 1982; 53: 370-4.

Microbiology. London, UK:Academic Press, 2000. 35. Tixador R, Richoilley G, Gasset G, et al. Study of

17. Orihuela CJ, Wilson C, Kawasaki M, Niesel DW. NASA minimal inhibatory concentrations of antibiotics on
NCC 2-1160. NASA’s Educational Brief. bacteria cultivated in vitro in space. Aviat Space Environ

18. Mattoni RH, Ebersold WT, Eiserling FA, Keller ED, Med 1985; 56: 748.

198

"
"7","Leys et al

36. Lapchine L, Moatti N, Gasset G, et al. Antibiotic activity Francis Group plc, London, UK; 2004 a.
in space. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1986; 12: 933-8. 42. Leys NMEJ, Wattiez R, Baatout S, De Boever P,

37. Moatti N, Lapchine L. Preliminary results of the ANTIBIO Mergeay M. Gene expression in Ralstonia metallidurans
experiment. Naturwisseschaften 1986; 73: 413. CH34 in space. Proceeding of Habitation 2004, Orlando,

38. Tixador R, Gasset G, Eche B, et al. Behavior of bacteria Florida, USA, Habitation - International Journal for
and antibiotics under space conditions. Aviat Space Human Support Research Special issue; 2004 b.
Environ Med 1994; 65: 551. 43. Leys NMEJ, Wattiez R, Baatout S, et al. MESSAGE:

39. Juergensmeyer MA, Juergensmeyer EA, Guikema JA. Microbial experiments in the space station about gene
Long-term exposure to space flight conditions affects expression. Proceedings of the Astrobiology Science
bacterial response to antibiotics. Microgravity Sci Conference, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett
Technol 1999; XII/1: 41-7. Field, California, USA; 2004 c.

40. Dose K, Bieger—Dose A, Dillmann R, Gill M, Kerz O, et 44. Mergeay M. Bacteria adapted to industrial biotopes:
al. ESA-experiment ‘Space Biochemistry’. Adv Space MetaI-resistant Ralstonia. In: Storz G, Hengge-Aronis R,
Res 1995; 16: 119-29. eds. Bacterial stress responses. Washington DC: ASM

41. Leys NMEJ, Wattiez R, Baatout S, et al. Gene Press; 2000.
espression in Ralstonia metallidurans CH34 in space 45. Mergeay M, Monchy S, Vallaeys T, et al. Ralstonia
flight. Proceedings of the European Symposium on metallidurans, a bacterium specifically adapted to toxic
Environmental Biotechnology 2004 (ESEB 2004), metals: Towards a catalogue of metaI-responsive genes.
Ostend, Belgium, A.A. Balkema Publishers, Taylor & FEMS Microbiology Reviews 2003; 778: 1-26.

199

"
