"","x"
"1","European Symposium on Environmental Biotechnology, ESEB 2004 -_ Verstraete (ed)
© 2004 Taylor & Francis Group, London, ISBN 90 5809 653 X
Gene expressmn 1n Ralstonia metallidurans CH34 1n space ﬂlght i 1; 1;;
~ N. Leys, S. Baatout, P. De Boever, A. Dams & M. Mergeay 4 -- r j; rt]:
Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK-CEN), M01, Belgium . ‘ ‘ 1.
R.Wattiez .. ~.. -
University ofMons-Hainaut (UMH), Mons, Belgium , ‘
P. Cornelis & S. Aendekerke ' . g
University of Brussels (UB), Brussel, Belgium ; ‘ .. g. "" “ ‘ "" ‘
ABSTRACT: The early detection of changes in bacterial communities and single bacterial cells that are pre-
sent in space ships or space stations is crucial for a variety of biosafety issues (zle. pathogenicity for crew,
biodegradation of materials, etc). Bacteria will also be essential for long-term manned missions (e.g. to Mars)""
for the recycling of waste and the production of food. The ESA-sponsored research pregram MESSAGE
(Microbial Experiments in the Space Station About Gene Expression) studied the effects of space conditions
such as microgravity and cosmic radiation on board the ISS on gene expression in a model bacterium; i.e.5 R.
metallidurans CH34 (ATCC 43123). Proteomic analysis clearly showed a differential gene expression between
space and ground grown cultures, producing different physiological characteristics of the cells as was'observed
by ﬂowcytometry analysis. The results of the MESSAGE experiments will be applied to improve ﬁirther devel-“
opment of “microbial life support systems” and systems to detect micro-organisms in air for applieation in the
International Space Station and ﬁiture 'space vehicles. _ . 1 a3""
1 INTRODUCTION expression. A well—known bacterium, i.e., R. ‘ metallidu:
- rans CH34 (ATCC 43123), was used as'a'niodel organ:
Space is very specific ecological environment. Bio- ism to study the synergetic effects of microgravity and
logical research in space has so far mainly concentrated higher cosmic radiation doses on general knoWn bac:
on animal and human cell behavior during space ﬂights ' terial stress response systems and to search for hew'.
for medical applications. However, with the growing stress responses. Bacterial cultures of this strain CH34
interest in prolonged missions, it becomes more import— were allowed to grow during 10 days in the ISS. Post-
ant to study also in detail the different aspects of ﬂight prOteins and RNA from cells grown; in space
microbial cell behavior in closed space environments. ﬂight and ground were extracted and analyzed.
Micro-organisms that are present in space vehicles, The scientific results obtained With'aifififs't'iMES-
space stations and ﬁiture interplanetary bases could be SAGE experiment (Odissea Mission; Belgian Taxi
of danger for the crew or could Cause bio-corrosion of Flight, October 2002) were re-evaluated with'a second
materials. The study of bacterial activity under space space experiment MESSAGE 2 (C‘eﬁantes'Mission,
conditions is therefore highly important for the early Spanish Soyuz Mission, 18—28 OctOber'2003)‘.
detection of changes in bacteria communities and sin— 1 .. 1;; I
gle bacterial cells with medical or environmental con— ‘- .. H’ 7;:
sequences. Nevertheless, bacteria will also be essential 2 M ATERI ALS AND METHODS
for Ion -t rm missions for th e lin of waste and ,
ge ereyc g
the production of food. . . . "" ‘ .. 1:11;..3';

The ESA-sponsored research program MESSAGE 2'1 Stram and growth COHdlthhS 1‘ . g .
stands for “Microbial Experiments in the SpaceStation R. metallidurans CH34 (ATCC43 1.23) is a ﬂexible,
About Gene Expression” and studied the effects of Versatile and robustwell-studied non-pathogienie bag?
the specific environmental space conditions on board terium which can grow at room temperatureandsur—
the International Space Station (ISS) bacterial gene vive in harsh environmental conditions. A draft version

1 29

"
"2","of its otal genome sequence is available on the web 4 CONCLUSION
(httpzllwwwjgi.doe.gov/programs/genomes.html). . .

CH34 was cultivated in aerobic rich and poor solid The MESSAGE eXperiments led to an unique View on '
agar medium and rich liquid medium. The cultures the molecular and the physiological response of a
were incubated at 4°C until launch, incubated in a whole organism to the speciﬁc growth condition of
closed container in the dark at room temperature (circa space. The combined application of different molecu-
22°C) in the Service Module of the ISS, transported lar and physiologic microbial methods revealed valu-
at 4°C after landing, and analyzed within 36 hours able information to understand better the microbial
after landing. A ground control experiment was inocu- adaptation to space environments.
lated at the same time and maintained at identical Bringing a known earth bacterium in space condi-
conditions parallel in time. tions can significantly change its gene expression.

, Space ﬂight conditions had a limited eﬁ‘ect on known
22 Molecular analysis stress response R. metallidurans CH34 but induced
, posmbly new unknown stress responses.
The molecular stress response of the bacteria was A international publication about the final results
analyzed using full protein and RNA extracts from of this experiment is in preparation.
space and ground grown cells.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS '
This project was funded by ESA via the contract
A limited number of genes were signiﬁcant over- for the BTF-MESSAGE project (Prodex agreement
. expressed in space grown cells in comparison to ground No. 90037) and the SSM-MESSAGA project (Prodex
' grown cells of Ralstonia metailidurans CH34. agreement No. 90094),
There was an induction of a few proteins possible
involved in “house keeping functions”. However, most
t. over produced proteins are possibly representing a CORRESPONDENCE
speciﬁc stress response to Space conditions and/or
3 metabolic changes. The transcription of other well- N. Leys, I
known stress related genes did not seem to be extra Belgian Nuclear Research Center (SCK°CEN)
; (de)actimted. Boeretang 200, 3-2400 M01, Belgium
In the second experiment, space grown mutants Tel. +32 14 33 27 26, Fax. +32 14 31 47 93
with the genes coding the proteins which are over nleys@sckcen.be
expressed in space inactivated, were ﬁmher analyzed
,. for gene expression and physiology. .
‘ To confirm these protonomic results transcrip-
.. tomie (RNA) analysis is going on using a full genome
H DNA gene chip of R. metaliidumrzs CH34.
~ 130 .

"
