"","x"
"1","43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2005-718
10 - 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada
Misclble Flulds 1n MlcrograVIty (MFMG): A Zero-Upmass
Experlment on the Internatlonal Space Statlon
John A. Pojman *
Department ofChemistrjy & Biochemistry, The University ofSouthern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS 39406
Nick Bessonov and Vitaly Volpert
Laboratoire d ’analyse numirique, Université Lyon 1, 69622, Villeurbanne Cedex, France
Mark S. Paley
A-Z T echnology, Marshall Space F light Center XD42, Huntsville, AL 35812

Four runs of the zero-upmass investigation, Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG),
were performed on the ISS. The goal of MFMG is to determine if interfacial phenomena
seen with immiscible ﬂuids could be seen with miscible ﬂuids. The experiments had to be
performed with existing materials on the ISS. Honey and water were chosen as the ﬂuids,
and urine collection syringes were used as the vessels in which the experiments were
performed. In March (Increment 8) Dr. Michael Foale performed four experiments under
isothermal conditions to determine: If a stream of honey injected into water would exhibit
the Rayleigh-Tomotika instability and break into small drops. If an aspherical drop of
water in honey would spontaneously assume a spherical shape. The experiments were
performed successfully. No behavior beyond simple diffusion was observed, which is
allowing us to estimate the maximum possible value of the square gradient parameter in our
model with the Navier-Stokes equations plus a Korteweg stress term. During Increment 9,
Mike Fiske performed two runs in which a stream of honey was injected into water while the
syringe was attached to the surface of the Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus
(CGBA) at approximately 31 °C. Preliminary analysis indicates that some ﬂuid motion
occurred. It is possible that the apparent migration of the stream was not caused by residual
buoyancy-induced convection and therefore may be an indication that Korteweg stresses can
be important in miscible ﬂuids.

1. Introduction

It is well known for immiscible ﬂuids that a drop of a ﬂuid in weightlessness will spontaneously achieve a
spherical geometry and will migrate in a temperature gradient. It is also well known that a stream of an immiscible
ﬂuid will break up with a wavelength approximately 2 31: times the diameter of the stream.

We have been studying transient interfacial phenomena in miscible ﬂuids for several years. Two—dimensional
numerical simulations showed that it was possible for an elliptical miscible drop to become Circular spontaneously.1
A ‘stream’ would begin to pinch off but would not break up — the Rayleigh—Tomotika instability does not exist for
the immiscible two—dimensional case either.2’ 3 We have shown that convection analogous to surface—tension
induced convection could occur with miscible ﬂuids using a model in which a Korteweg—stress term was added to
the Navier—Stokes model.4 An essential question is magnitude of the square gradient parameter, k, that appears in
the model.

In March 2002, NASA called for zero—upmass experiments that could be performed on the 188 with materials
already on board the station. We proposed an experiment called Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG).

* Professor, Chemistry & Biochemistry, The University of Southern Mississippi, and AIAA member
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2005 by John A. Pojman. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"2","We had two scientiﬁc objectives:

1) T 0 determine if isothermal miscible ﬂuids can exhibit transient interfacial phenomena Similar to that Observed
with immiscible ﬂuids. Speciﬁcally, we proposed that a stream of a miscible ﬂuid would breakup into drops as a
stream of oil would in water from the Rayleigh-Tomotika instability. We also proposed that a blob of water in
honey could spontaneously become spherical as happens with immiscible ﬂuids. Of course, the drops and streams
eventually would dissolve but during the slow diffusion process, these transient phenomena might occur.

2) T 0 determine if miscible ﬂuids in a thermal gradient can exhibit transient interfacial phenomena Similar to
that observed with immiscible ﬂuids. Speciﬁcally, we proposed that a stream of honey in water could migrate and/or
breakup in a temperature gradient and blob of water in honey could also migrate for it is well known that immiscible
drops and bubbles migrate in thermal gradients.

We then had to identify potential ﬂuids and develop a means to perform the experiments, including creating a
temperature gradient. We determined that one ﬂuid would be water and so we evaluated several other water-soluble
ﬂuids that are on the ISS, including rinseless shampoo, Edge shaving gel, ultrasound gel, and honey. We
determined that honey and water would be the best miscible ﬂuids because the astronauts had ready access to
Russian honey for their tea and the properties were closest to a Newtonian ﬂuid.

The next problem was to determine the vessel for performing the experiments. We created a vessel from urine
collection syringes and crew drinking straws (Fig. l). The syringes had to be modiﬁed by using a Leatherman tool
to make the plunger able to be moved the complete length of the syringe. Also, the plunger had a large void, which
Figure 1. Left: A modiﬁed urine collection syringe. The marks are 1 cm apart. Right: The plunger of the
syringe was ﬁlled with Duxseal.
would have allowed a large bubble to be present. Duxseal, a plumbing repair compound, was used to ﬁll this void.

We also needed a means to create a temperature gradient across the syringe. With the help of Bioserve Space
Technologies, we decided to use the Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus (CGBA), which can maintain a
temperature of 37 °C, although it cools down once it is disconnected and moved.

Video was taken of the experiments. And some cases, we were able to watch the experiment in real time. The
crew member also took digital still images at 30 second intervals.

There were several serious limitations to performing the experiments under these constraints. We were not able
to neither choose optimal ﬂuids nor be able to actually characterize the ﬂuids used. We did obtain a can of honey
similar to the ones on the 188 but the properties of honey are strongly dependent on the water content. Honey can
also crystallize and so astronaut Dr. Michael Foale heated the honey in the crew food warmer in J anuary 2004 to
make sure the honey would be liquid.

Another serious issue was the lack of information on the residual acceleration levels. Thus, any ﬂuid motion we
might observe could be due to residual buoyancy—induced convection and so at best, our results may be suggestive
of further research avenues worth pursuing.

Finally, because we were not able to train the crew member and two different crew members performed
experiments, the crew member had to learn how to do the experiment based on our written procedures and in real—
time discussions.

Dr. Foale modified our procedures by using a large syringe to store all the honey from the can. He also
developed a nice procedure for eliminating bubbles in the syringes by slinging the syringes on a string to use
centrifugal force to move the bubbles. Still, it was very difficult to introduce one ﬂuid into another without air being

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","entrained. Bubbles pose a serious problem because of the occurrence of surface—tension induced convection.5
Bubbles can migrate in a temperature and/or concentration gradient.6'8

II. The Experiments
A. MFMG-Isothermal

The goals of the experiment were:

1) To determine if a stream of honey injected into water would exhibit the Rayleigh-Tomotika instabilityz’3 and
break into small drops.

2) To determine if an aspherical drop of water in honey would spontaneously assume a spherical shape.

Four runs were performed by Dr. Michael Foale during Increment 8.

1. Run 1 .' a stream ofpure honey was injected into pure water.

Dr. Foale injected the honey stream but air bubbles also appeared. Some movement of the stream was observed,
although it is difﬁcult to see this in Fig. 2. The bubbles also moved, which suggest residual acceleration caused the
ﬂow. However, it is clear that the stream did not exhibit the Rayleigh-Tomitika instability.

__ .. I
- 'ﬂ '* “h“ Ia

.T i ,

u-

-— ﬂ "" "" - “lg
' :2 '.;.
Figure 2. Top: A stream of pure honey injected into water. Bottom: The same stream 10 minutes later.
Black marks are 1 cm apart.
2. Run 2: a stream ofdiluted honey was injected into pure water.

Some honey was diluted to 20% in water and injected into pure water. It was not possible to observe the stream

because of the poor contrast between the honey and the water.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","3. Run 3: a blob ofpure water (withfood coloring) was injected into diluted honey.

20% honey water was used for the injection of dyed water. The intent was to create a blob of water and see if it
could spontaneously become spherical. The injection was not smooth and so the water was distributed more than
was desired. Also, bubbles were present. Fig. 3 shows that the shape of the water did not signiﬁcantly Change but
some of the bubbles moved toward the “top” of the image. Several explanations are possible: The residual g vector
had changed so that the bubbles was just ‘ﬂoating up”. It could be that Marangoni convection caused by the honey
— water concentration gradient propelled the bubbles. Or it may be that some effective interfacial convection
occurred, although this seems unlikely given that the shape of the water did not Change except near the inlet. At that
point the concave water region became slightly less concave. However, the motion of the bubbles is synchronized
with this water motion and so probably buoyancy-driven convection was at work.

'.'-'-._-.I .'- Iii
LURJEII: III-il
Figure 3. Top: Dyed water inj ected into diluted honey. Bottom: Same 10 minutes later.
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","4. Run 4: a blob ofdyed water was injected into pure honey.

Figure 4. A blob of dyed water injected into pure honey.
Bottom: After 10 minutes.

B. MFMG-Thermal

The goals of MFMG-Thermal were:

1) To determine if a stream of honey in water will migrate in a
temperature gradient.

2) To determine if a drop of water in honey will migrate in a
temperature gradient.

To create a temperature gradient, the CGBA was heated to its
maximum temperature, 37 °C, and removed from its rack. It was
placed on the work area. Duxseal was placed on the heated surface,
and the syringe was affixed. Duxseal was placed on the opposite of
the syringe to aid heat transfer. The temperature on each side was
measured with a thermal probe.

‘1' -
w ‘jt
._ — -. ""' i
'4‘
1—. “""_
l4“
. |"" II].
Figure 5. A syringe attached to the CGBA surface With Duxseal.
Four runs were planned but only two have been completed as of this writing, during Increment 9 by astronaut Mike
Fincke.
Run 1 .' a stream ofpure honey was injected into pure water.
The ambient temperature was 24.2 °C. The temperature difference across the syringe immediately before the
injection of the honey was 30.4 °C — 28.4 °C. After 10 minutes, it had relaxed to 29.5 °C — 28.5 °C. Figure 6 shows
the stream of honey bent toward the Duxseal, which is at the higher temperature. This could reﬂect some migration
of the stream or buoyancy-driven convection. What is Clear is that the stream did not break up into drops.
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","Figure 6. A stream of honey 7 minutes after being injected into pure water in a temperature gradient. High
temperature (30.4 °C) is on the left While the temperature of the Duxseal on the right is 28.4 °C.
Run 2: a stream ofdiluted honey (5 0:5 0) was injected into pure water.

This was the most successful and interesting run. Mike Fincke improved the procedures by putting the Duxseal
near the injector so that the honey stream would deﬁnitely be in the temperature gradient. He also obtained superb
images of the syringe after injection and was able to have a large temperature difference (5 °C).

""The honey mixture immediately wanted to go to the hot side, in fact the photo along the hot side -
and then, I won't say it bounced off the stopper, but went around the stopper and up the side where the
cold is, so the gradient in between the cold side and the warm side is there, we measured it, but the
ﬂuid right now is at the warm side of the - excuse me, the honey mixture is mainly at the warm side of
the tube, and there's a little bit on the cold side where it came off the stopper and went on to the cold
side.”

Figure 7 shows how the honey stream comes out of the injector and is close against the heated surface of the
syringe. Notice the bubble near the plunger that is also near the wall. (In Fig. 8 we can see the bubble before the
honey-water stream injection. The bubble is in the central axis of the temperature gradient and closest to the high
temperature side.) If its position were only because of residual buoyancy-driven convection, then the honey, which
is more dense than water, would be on the opposite side of the syringe. Instead, it is more likely that the bubble has
migrated toward the warmer surface. It seems possible, if not likely, that the honey-water stream also migrated.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7",". - L
"" I . . . .l d.-
_ '4 II 5 1' ""‘ . .
g _ _'f hnney
. ‘I H E:-
Figure 7. A stream of honey-water (50:50) 3.5 minutes after being injected into pure water in a temperature
gradient. High temperature (31.5 °C) is on the bottom While the temperature of the Duxseal 0n the top is 25.5
°C.
111. Modeling
We have developed a mathematical
model for Korteweg stresses in miscible
ﬂuids in which the stress tensor terms are
added to the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equation. We consider mass, energy and
momentum conservation. If we assume:
21) Thermal and diffusive ﬂuxes are
small,
b) The internal energy has the form,
2
e = e + kVC
Figure 8. The position of the bubble before the injection of the .0 | | .
honey-water stream. c) caplllary forces are tangentlal t0 the
composition gradient,
d) the ﬂuids are incompressible and
have the same density and Viscosity, we obtain the following model.
g + VVT = KAT
at
g + VAC = DAc
At
[@ + L
A—V+(vA)v - -1. .WHLJ ”1 W2
At p p v [va +5
L vx1 vx2
diV V = 0
Here T is the temperature, V is the ﬂuid velocity, p is the pressure, V is the kinematic Viscosity, p is the density
and c is the concentration(m01e fraction) of polymer. Kij are the stress tensor terms, deﬁned by:
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","=40
8x2
K12 = K21: _k:i
_x1 _X2
K22 = k:::
_—x1_
where k is system specific, with units of N.

Our model has previously been validated by comparing steady—state simulations, in which the concentration ﬁeld
was fixed, to steady—state simulations of a true interface model.9 In this analysis we use an adaptive grid
formulation. This current method uses conservation laws (mass, momentum, energy) in integral form. Using
integral forms instead of differentials enables the use of a Viscosity that is dependent on concentration.10 In addition
we use a “pressure—velocity” instead of the “stream—function and vorticity” as our basic variables.

For the initial width of the transition zone we used a value of 0.05 mm. The square gradient parameter, k, can not
be easily measured although we estimated it from spinning drop tensiometry for glycerin and water to be on the
order of 10—8 N. We used this value for the simulations.

We obtained two cans of the same type of honey used on the ISS and measured its Viscosity at room temperature
as a function of the water fraction (Fig. 9) using a Brookﬁeld Viscosity. Honey is a supersaturated solution of sugars
in water and so pure honey contains 0.2 fraction of water. These values are suspect because honey almost certainly
is a non—Newtonian ﬂuid and shows shear thinning. Therefore, the values are probably too low, especially for the
low water content samples. Nonetheless, we used the values to develop a function for the Viscosity for the
simulations:

Viscosity (c) = 0.001 + 5899*exp(—39 c)
o Viscosity (Pa 3)
D Calculated visc (Pa 3)
100
10
i
%
A i
w 1
CG
Bi
£9 0.1
8 D
.3 0 01
> .
D
0.001 D D D D D :I
0.0001
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
fraction water
Figure 9. The Viscosity of the Russian honey as a function of water content.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","C. Simulation of streams of honey in water

We simulated a stream of honey with 0.8 fraction of water in water with the transition width of 0.5 mm and k =
10‘8 N. We used cylindrical coordinates for the three—dimensional representation. For the Viscosity we used
Viscosity (C) = 0.002411 * 65%“ Pa s.
For a D = 10‘6 cm2 s‘l, no instability was observed. The instability only occurred if diffusion did not occur. These
results are consistent with the lack of stream breakup in the experiments. However, it hardly confirms the validity of
the Korteweg stress model.

10 sec Concentration 3010 sec Concentration
-

Figure 10. Stream of waterﬂmney in water with diffusion after 3000 s and k = 10'8 N
545 sec Concentration 940 sec Concentration
Figure 11. Stream of waterﬂmney in water without diffusion, k = 10'8 N. Instability begins at 500 s.
D. Simulations of water drops in honey

Because of the symmetry of the problem, we only simulated one quadrant of the domain, which is 3 X 3 cm. We
took 10‘6 cm2 s‘1 for the diffusion coefficient. For k = 10‘8 N, there is a significant Change in shape for the water in
water—honey solution. Since we did not observe such a significant flow, k must be less than 10‘8 N,

For water in pure honey, very little Change is seen consistent with the experimental results. And we can
conclude that k again must be less than 10‘8 N for honey water

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","_ 580 sec Concentration
1 sec Concentratlon

Figure 12. Time evolution of a drop of water (black region) in honey. K = 10'8 N.
E. Effect of Temperature Gradient

Bessonov et al. showed that a drop can migrate in a temperature gradient if the square gradient parameter is
temperature dependent.4 However, even if the square gradient parameter is temperature independent, convection
can occur if the diffusion coefﬁcient is temperature dependent.11 A gradient in temperature will mean a gradient in
the diffusion coefﬁcient. As time passes, this will cause a gradient in the transition zone between the honey and
water, which will cause a gradient in the effective interfacial tension. This should lead to migration of a drop or
stream toward the high temperature region. Simulations are underway to determine if the observed migration can be
explained through the mechanism.

IV. Conclusion

Four experiments were performed with honey and water under isothermal conditions. For a stream of honey
injected into water, no Rayleigh—Tomotika instability was observed. A blob of water did not appear to change its
shape. Numerical simulations indicate that if the Korteweg—stress model is correct then the square gradient
parameter must have a value < 10—8 N . Two experiments were performed with temperature gradients. For the
injection of diluted honey into water, the stream migrated to the high temperature side of the syringe. An air bubble
also remained on the high temperature side. Because honey is more dense than water, we would expect that if
residual acceleration accounted for the migration of the bubble then honey would migrate to the opposite sides of the
syringe. Simulations will need to be performed to test if the observed migration can be explained with a Korteweg—
stress model.

Acknowledgments
Support for this project was provided by NASA’s Microgravity Materials Science Program (NAG8—1466). We
thank the MFMG team for their hard work and perseverance: Melanie Bodiford, Larry Cotton, Glen Funkhouser,
Lucinda Murphy, Julia Ogle, Steve Paley, Frank Parris, J ohn Yates and Ron Young. We also are deeply indebted to
Dr. Michael Foale and Mike Fincke for their skill and hard work.
References
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","1) Volpert, V. A.; Pojman, J . A.; TeXier-Picard, R. ""Convection Induced by Composition Gradients in Miscible Systems,""C.
R. Mecanique 2002, 330, 353-358.

2) Tomotika, S. ""On the Instability of a Cylindrical Thread of a Viscous Liquid Surrounded by Another Viscous Fluid,""Proc.
Roy. Soc. (London) 1935, A150, 322-337.

3) Tomotika, S. ""Breaking up of a Drop of Viscous Liquid Immersed in Another Viscous Fluid Which is Extending at a
Uniform Rate,""Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) 1936, 153, 302-318.

4) Bessonov, N.; Pojman, J . A.; Volpert, V. ""Modelling of Diffuse Interfaces With Temperature Gradients,""J. Engineering
Math. 2004, 49, 321-338.

5) Kamotani, Y.; Ostrach, S. ""Analysis of Velocity data taken in Surface Tension Driven Convection Experiment in
Microgravity,""Phys. Fluids 1994, 6, 3601-3609.

6) Balasubramaniam, R.; Lacy, C. E.; Woniak, G.; Subramanian, R. S. ""Thermocapillary Migration of Bubbles and Drops at
Moderate Values of the Marangoni Number in Reduced Gravity,""Phys. F luids 1996, 8, 872-880.

7) Antanovskii, L. K.; Monti, R.; R. Fortezza, G. D.; Castagnolo, D. ""Transient Marangoni Migration of a Bubble Within a
Solidifying Material in Microgravity Environment,""ELGRA Annual Meeting and General Assembly 1993,

8) Wei, H.; Subramanian, R. S. ""Migration of a Pair of Bubbles under the Combined Action of Gravity and
Thermocapillarity,""Journal ofColloz'd and Interface Science 1995, I 72, 395-406.

9) Pojman, J.; Volpert, V., Dumont, T.; Chekanov, Y.; Masere, J.; Wilke, H., Effective Interfacial Tension Induced
Convection (EITIC) in miscible ﬂuids, AIAA 2001-0764,39th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 2001,

10) Bessonov, N. M.; Song, D. J. ""Application of Vector Calculus to Numerical Solutions of Continuum Mechanics
Problems,""J. Comp. Phys. 2001, 167, 22-38.

11) Bessonov, N.; Pojman, J . A.; Volpert, V., Numerical Simulations of Transient Interfacial Phenomena in Miscible Fluids,
AIAA-2004-631,42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 2004,

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
