"","x"
"1","DISCOVERY OF SPACEFLIGHT-RELATED VIRULENCE MECHANISMS IN SALMONELLA AND
OTHER MICROBIAL PATHOGENS: NOVEL APPROACHES TO COMMERCIAL VACCINE
DEVELOPMENT
Shameema Sarkerl, C. Mark Ott2, J ennifer Barrilal, and Cheryl A. Nickerson1
1T he Biodesign Institute, Centerfor Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, T empe, AZ
2Habitability and Environmental Factors Division, NASA-Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX
ABSTRACT infectious disease risk is unclear. Previous studies have
indicated that spaceﬂight weakens the immune system in
Understanding infectious disease risks during spaceﬂight is humans and animals (Gueguinou et a1, 2009). In addition,
critical to provide safe passage for human space exploration and preﬂight and in-ﬂight monitoring Of the International
holds potential for innovations in infectious disease control for Space Station (ISS) and other spacecraft indicates the
the general public. The key to thisresearch is the noyeiway that presence of Opportunistic pathogens and the p otential for
cells adapt and respond to spaceﬂight, as they exhibit important . . . . .
biological characteristics that are directly relevant to human obligate pgthogens'. Altered antibiotic res1stance Of
health and disease including changes in immune function, cellular microorganisms in ﬂlght has also been shoyvn (Klaus et a1,
stress responses, and infectious disease potential that are not 2006)- AS astronauts and cosmonauts llVe for longer
observed using traditional experimental approaches. We periods in ClOSCd environments, especially those ‘15ng
discovered that spaceﬂight uniquely alters the Virulence and gene recycled water and air, there is an increased risk to
expression of the bacterial pathogen Salmonella typhimurium, crewmembers of infectious disease events occurring in-
and that the conserved, small regulatory RNA-binding protein, ﬂight. Therefore, understanding how the space
qu, plays a central role in regulating the Salmonellaspaceﬂight environment affects microorganisms and their disease
response. we have subsequently Shown that Spaceﬂlght culture potential is critically important for spaceﬂight missions
also alters the qu regulon 1n otherbaeterial pathogens: As qu d . f rther stud
regulation is often assomated w1th ionic salt concentrations, we an requires u y'
discovered that altering the concentration of certain ionic salts, . . .
like phosphates, in the growth media prevents the increased From an Earth-based perspective, the eradication or control
disease causing potential of Salmonella during spaceﬂight. 0f many microbial diseases has dramatically improved
Collectively, our results suggest that RNA binding regulatory public health and longevity, however, infectious diseases
proteins and their small RNA binding counterparts may be key to are still a leading cause of human death and illness
a COHSGTVGCL common 06111113? Spaceﬂight response meChanism in worldwide. Infectious disease causes 35 percent of deaths
bacterial cells that can be manipulated by environmental salt/ioh globally, and is the world's biggest killer of Children and
levels. The Imphcfatlons .Of our .ﬁndmgs would affeCt NASA S young adults. Within the United States, infectious disease
approach to infectious disease risk assessment, development of . . . .
biological processing systems for exploration, and other mission- has a tremendous social, economic, and security impact.
related functions. Knowledge gained from this work will Total costs for infectious disease in the US. exceed $120
broaden our knowledge of microbial cells for both spaceﬂight 131111011 annually due to direct medical and IOSt productIVIty
and Earth based applications and holds translational potential for COStS. Perhaps the greatest application from spaceﬂight life
the development of vaccines and therapeutics for the general sciences research Will not apply directly to spaceﬂight, but
public. rather to improving the quality of life on Earth — for
example, through the development of novel strategies to
combat infection and disease. Internationally, we face
Spaceﬂight offers a unique platform to study the effects of many challenges to our health by microbial threats.
the microgravity environment 011 cell and tissue function, Antibiotic resistant strains are on the rise, regional diseases
eXplore fundamental questions about human health, and are expanding to new locations, the threat of bioterrorism
advance 0111‘ understanding Of cellular and molecular 10011139 and a multitude of infectious diseases have
processes in both normal and diseased cells. For example, inadequate or no treatments. New diagnostic, treatment
spaceﬂight research into infectious disease holds and prevention paradigms are thus urgently needed. The
tI‘CandOUS potential t0 bCHCﬁt bOth the crew and thC knowledge gained from spaceﬂight research can advance
general public on Earth. From a Spaceﬂight pCISpective, and accelerate therapeutic and vaccine development and
human presence in Space, whether permanent or implementation of new strategies for translation of this
temporary, is accompanied by the presence of microbes. research into health beneﬁts for the developing world. The
However, the extent of microbial changes in response to costs of therapeutics and vaccine development can be
spaceﬂight conditions and the corresponding changes to prohibitively high. Bringing a new drug to market can cost
in excess of one billion dollars and take over a decade
before it reaches the patient. If the knowledge gained from
spaceﬂight studies into the mechanisms of infection and
* Correspondencetos Cheryl A. Nickerson disease provides even an incremental decrease in these
The Biodesign Institute costs and timelines (Which studies strongly suggest is the
Arizona State University case), then this research is of tremendous importance.
1001 S. McAllister Avenue, Tempe, AZ 85287
Email: Cheryl-A-Ni0k6r50n@asu-ed” It should be noted, however, that the current goal of
Phone: 480'727'7520; Fax: 480'727'8943 spaceﬂight research is not to produce vaccines in ﬂight.
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 75

"
"2","S. Sarker et al. — Spaceﬂight Virulence Studies and Vaccine Development
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for new the bacteria that cause intestinal and diarrheal disease,
drugs and therapeutics takes years and production cost can considered to be one of the greatest health problems
exceed one billion dollars on the ground. The additional globally. Indeed, S. typhimurium infection is one of the
costs and logistics that would be incurred for a similar most common food-borne infections worldwide. In the
effort in ﬂight would be prohibitive from both a cost and United States, an estimated 2 million cases occur, resulting
schedule standpoint. Instead, the immediate goal is to in 168,000 Visits to physicians, 15,000 hospitalizations and
identify target mechanisms in space and then investigate 580 deaths annually. S. lyphimurium accounts for
these mechanisms on Earth in terms of their potential to approximately 30% of deaths caused by food-borne
serve as novel drug/vaccine/therapeutic candidates to infections in the United States, and is even more
effectively protect against infection and disease. By detrimental in the developing world. The total cost
understanding more fully how microbial pathogens associated with S. lyphimurium infections in the US is
respond and adapt to novel environmental stimuli (in this estimated at three billion dollars annually.
case, microgravity), we can develop new methods to treat
and prevent the spread of infectious agents. The approach Since spaceﬂight experiments are a rare opportunity, our
of utilizing extreme environments to provide new initial studies into the effect of spaceﬂight on microbial
mechanistic insight into how biological systems adapt and Virulence and gene expression began by using ground-
respond is not new. Indeed, many breakthroughs in life based spaceﬂight analogue culture systems (Nickerson et
sciences research have come from studying liVing systems al, 2000; Nickerson et al, 2004), which systematically led
in unique and extreme environments. It is from studying to our ﬂight experiments (Wilson et al, 2007; Wilson,
the response of biological systems under these 2008) (Figure 1). These early experimental efforts
environments that we have not only gained new concentrated on the use of a unique bioreactor, called the
fundamental insight into how they function and adapt to Rotating Wall Vessel (RWV), designed at the NASA
extreme conditions, but have also translated these ﬁndings Johnson Space Center in Houston as a ground-based
into beneﬁcial biotechnology and biomedical advances to spaceﬂight analogue. The RWV bioreactor allows for the
improve our quality of life. Spaceﬂight is simply the next culture of cells (microbial or mammalian) in the laboratory
logical progression and extreme environment to study in under conditions that mimic several aspects of the
this regard. Still, it is important to remember that while spaceﬂight environment, and can be used to induce many
identiﬁcation of novel vaccine targets holds tremendous of the biological changes that occur to cells and organisms
potential to provide the next ground breaking advances in during spaceﬂight. Our initial ground-based studies
public health, the practical application of therapeutics showed that culture of S. lyphimurium in this ﬂight
derived from such discoveries will take several years for analogue environment globally alters the gene expression,
approval and translation to the clinical setting. stress resistance and Virulence of this organism (Nickerson
et al, 2000; Wilson et al, 2002a; Wilson et al, 2002b). In
To investigate the effects of the microgravity environment addition, by using mathematical modeling (Nauman et al,
of spaceﬂight on microbial pathogenesis, we chose the 2007), we found that culture of S. lyphimurium in both
model enteric bacterial pathogen, Salmonella lyphimurium, spaceﬂight analogue conditions as well as true spaceﬂight,
for both our spaceﬂight analogue and spaceﬂight studies, produces an environment that is relevant to conditions
as it is among the best characterized pathogens and poses a encountered by the pathogen during infection in the human
risk to both the crew during ﬂight and for the general host. Overall, the data from our RWV experiments led to a
public on Earth. S. typhimurium is one of the most readily better understanding of the potential alterations in
and fully understood pathogens and belongs to a large microbial Virulence and gene expression in spaceﬂight and
group of bacteria whose natural habitat is the intestinal the relevance of our ﬁndings for the development of new
tract of humans and animals. This group includes most of strategies to combat infectious disease on Earth.
First Basin Edema Flitdizg - Spaceflight agilogue cultur:
(RWV) altei's Salmaﬁla xintlence, SXress resistance, and
l m‘ Emmioagﬁickerson etalJnfect human, 2090!: .
Spareeﬂight analogue culture (REV?) globally alters
Saawﬁa’x‘a genre. expresﬁon (Wilson et al, Pmc. Rat}.
l Acad. Sci, USA. 2002) '
FTGgESS E‘s'e alteraﬁo us in Safrﬁziﬁeﬁé rEﬁ‘roases With
introduction 0% ﬂuid shear in Spaceﬂight aﬁsiogne
‘ ﬁﬁmre {RW‘JS} {Hawaii eta], Appl. Emimn Microbial, '
True spaceﬂight alters Eﬁimoﬁeﬁa V‘il’uilfi’iff and gate
expﬁrssion aﬁd id-entifia role fee: $53; regulator H£=q
1915-115) gwusnn et al, Prat. Natl. Acait salsa, 2007; '
fﬁedés composition, if. ion concentrm‘hm, iﬂnmiﬁ
regulatory and virulence respajnse 2:»; Smmrieéiéa in
l spaceﬂight culture (STS-123) (Wilson et al, PLoS ONE,
4998}—
Figure 1. Discovery timeline: S. typhimurium investigations in Space and spaceﬂight analogues
76 Gravitational and Space Biology 23 (2) August 2010

"
"3","The ﬁrst investigation of alterations in microbial Virulence culture of this same organism in M9 minimal media in
in response to spaceﬂight was operationally designated spaceﬂight did not result in an increase in Virulence
MICROBE, and was ﬂown aboard STS-115 in September, (Wilson et al., 2002). To determine the effect of inorganic
2006. The purpose of the MICROBE experiment was to ion concentration on the Virulence of S. typhimurium, we
examine the global effects of spaceﬂight on microbial gene also supplemented LB medium with inorganic ions to the
expression and Virulence attributes. This experiment same levels as those found in M9 medium and tested the
conducted by our lab was the ﬁrst study to examine the effect on Virulence during spaceﬂight. We found that this
effect of spaceﬂight on the Virulence of a pathogen, and ion supplementation was sufﬁcient to prevent the enhanced
the ﬁrst to obtain the entire gene expression response of a S. typhimurium Virulence imparted by spaceﬂight culture
bacterium to spaceﬂight. In this experiment, we performed (Wilson et al., 2008). Subsequent testing in ground-based
1) whole genome microarray-mediated and proteomic gene RWV culture indicted that the altered acid tolerance
expression proﬁling, and 2) Virulence proﬁling of the exhibited by S. lyphimurium during culture in LB alone
microbial pathogens S. typhimurium, Pseudomonas was prevented with the addition of inorganic phosphate.
aeruginosa, and Candida albicans in response to These results demonstrated a direct correlation between
spaceﬂight as compared to identical synchronous ground phosphate ion concentration and the phenotypic
controls. The model microorganisms were selected as they pathogenesis-related acid stress response of S.
have been isolated from pre-ﬂight or in-ﬂight monitoring, typhimurium to the environment of spaceﬂight analogue
represent different degrees of pathogenic behaVior, are culture. Moreover, a comparison of data from the
well characterized, and have sequenced genomes with spaceﬂight cultures to identical synchronous ground
available microarrays. In addition, the extensive studies of control cultures showed that spaceﬂight uniquely
S. typhimurium by our lab using the RWV demonstrated exacerbates S. typhimurium Virulence effect in an ion-
important changes in the genotypic, phenotypic, and dependent fashion (Wilson et al., 2008). These ﬁndings
Virulence characteristics of this pathogen resulting from conﬁrmed that Virulence in S. typhimurium can be
exposure to a ﬂight-like environment (i.e. modeled inﬂuenced by the environmental stimulus of spaceﬂight,
microgravity). Published results from MICROBE showed and that the response to this stimulus can be manipulated
that S. typhimurium grown in rich LB media in spaceﬂight to improve astronaut health measures and exploited to
displayed increased Virulence, bioﬁlm-like formation, and better understand microbial pathogenesis and holds
global alterations in gene expression, as compared to promise for the development of innovative therapeutics
synchronous ground controls (Wilson et al, 2007). A and vaccines for the generalpublic on Earth.
central role was identiﬁed for the conserved, small
regulatory RNA-binding protein qu in regulating key Finally, the MICROBE and MDRV experiments indicated
aspects of the S. typhimurium spaceﬂight microgravity that despite profoundly different Salmonella Virulence
response. In addition, many genes encoding ion response responses to spaceﬂight culture induced by the two media
pathways showed altered expression during spaceﬂight, (LB and M9), we found several common genes and gene
reinforcing our earlier results observed in the spaceﬂight- families were altered in expression in both media during
analogue RWV bioreactor culture of S. typhimurium spaceﬂight culture. As with spaceﬂight growth in rich LB
(Wilson et al, 2007). media, S. lyphimurium grown in minimal M9 media during
ﬂight displayed differential expression of many genes,
In 2008, we were fortunate to have the opportunity to ﬂy a including those associated with either the regulation of, or
second spaceﬂight experiment on STS-123, which was in regulation by, the qu protein and small regulatory RNAs
combination with several other researchers’ experiments (Wilson et al., 2008). Moreover, in collaboration with our
investigating microbial responses to spaceﬂight. This colleagues, we have also shown that both spaceﬂight and
experiment, operationally designated as MDRV (Microbial spaceﬂight analogue culture alters the qu regulon of other
Drug Resistance and Virulence), allowed us to test our bacterial pathogens, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa
hypothesis that media ion concentrations could be (Crabbe et al, 2009; Crabbe et al, Manuscript submitted).
manipulated to prevent/turn off the enhanced S. Identiﬁcation of these genes, whose expression is
typhimurium Virulence imparted during spaceﬂight. In commonly regulated by the low ﬂuid shear environment of
addition, the MDRV experiment also provided us with the spaceﬂight, provides key targets whose expression can be
opportunity to independently validate our Virulence and manipulated to control microbial responses, including
gene expression results obtained from MICROBE on an potential use for development of vaccines and therapeutics.
independent Shuttle mission. Consistent with our
hypothesis, we found that spaceﬂight-induced increases in Our current research efforts are focused on constructing a
S. typhimurium Virulence are regulated by media ion detailed “molecular roadmap” from this data to
composition, and that phosphate ion is sufﬁcient to alter mechanistically explain how the observed microbial gene
related pathogenesis responses in a spaceﬂight analogue expression changes in-ﬂight correlate with phenotypic
model (Wilson et al., 2008). Speciﬁcally, the increased S. responses, including changes in Virulence. The results of
typhimurium Virulence observed with cultures grown in these studies will provide important new insight for
spaceﬂight in rich LB medium was not exhibited with microbial risk assessment for both long and short duration
cultures grown in M9 minimal medium. In the latter spaceﬂight missions. In addition, our recent Shuttle
regard, we had previously shown that unlike S. spaceﬂight experiment on STS-131 in March 2010,
typhimurium cultured in rich LB media during spaceﬂight, operationally designated as STL-IMMUNE, characterized
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 77

"
"4","S. Sarker et a1. — Spaceﬂight Virulence Studies and Vaccine Development

the host-pathogen interaction when both the host and Microbiology and Molecular Biology ReViews. 68:345-

pathogen were simultaneously exposed to the microgravity 361.

environment of spaceﬂight. This was the ﬁrst experiment

to proﬁle the infection process in human cells during Wilson, J.W., Ramamurthy, R., Porwollik, S., McClelland,

spaceﬂight. We are currently analyzing the data from this M., Hammond, T., Allen, P., Ott, C.M., Pierson, D.L., and

study, including cellular responses of human intestinal and CA. Nickerson. 2002. Microarray analysis identiﬁes

lung cells before and after infection with S. lyphimurium 0r Salmonella genes belonging to the 10w-shear modeled

Staphylococcus aureus, respectively, during spaceﬂight, microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.

and are characterizing changes in immune function and 99:13807-13812.

cellular stress responses, cellular differentiation as well as

targeted gene expression proﬁling. Wilson, J .W., Ramamurthy, R., Ott, C.M., Porwollik, S.,
McClelland, M., Pierson, D., and Nickerson, CA. 2002.

Moreover, our research continues to expand toward Low shear modeled microgravity alters the Salmonella

translationally advancing the ﬁndings from our recent lyphimurium response in an RpoS-independent manner.

spaceﬂight experiments into novel clinical applications to Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:5408-5416.

combat infectious disease. Using the targets that we have

found, we are collaborating with Dr. Roy Curtiss III, a Wilson, J.W., C.M. Ott, K. Héner zu Bentrup, R.

pioneer and world leader in vaccine development, to Ramamurthy, L. Quick, S. Porwollik, P. Cheng, M.

develop innovative and effective vaccines and therapeutics McClelland, G. Tsaprailis, T. Radabaugh, A. Hunt, D.

to protect against infectious disease using the spaceﬂight Fernandez, E. Richter, M. Shah, M. Kilcoyne, L. Joshi, M.

discovery platform. These and other efforts hold potential Nelman-Gonzalez, S. Hing, M. Parra, P. Dumars, K.

for development of novel strategies to mitigate health risks Norwood, R. Bober, J . DeVich, A. Ruggles, C. Goulart, M.

to the crew during spaceﬂight and for translation to the Rupert, L. Stodieck, P. Stafford, L. Catella, M.J. Schurr,

clinical bedside to advance the health and quality of life for K. Buchanan, L. Morici, J . McCracken, P. Allen, C. Baker-

the general public. Coleman, T. Hammond, J . Vogel, R. Nelson, D.L. Pierson,
H.M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and CA. Nickerson. 2007.
Spaceﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence

REFERENCES and reveals role for global regulator qu. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 104(41):16299-304.

Crabbe, A., Pycke, B., Houdt, R.V., Monsieurs, P.,

Nickerson, C., Leys, N. and Cornelis, P. 2010. Response Wilson J .W., Ott CM, Quick L, DaVis R, zu Bentrup KH,

of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAOl to low shear modeled Crabbe A, Richter E, Sarker S, Barrila J, Porwollik S,

microgravity involves AlgU regulation. Environ. Cheng P, McClelland M, Tsaprailis G, Radabaugh T, Hunt

Microbiol. 2010 Jun;12(6):1545-64. A, Shah M, Nelman-Gonzalez M, Hing S, Parra M,
Dumars P, Norwood K, Bober R, DeVich J, Ruggles A,

Gueguinou, N., Huin-Schohn, C., Bascove, M., Bueb, J .L., CdeBaca A, Narayan S, Benjamin J , Goulart C, Rupert M,

Tschirhart, E., Legrand-Frossi, C., and Frippiat, J .P. 2009. Catella L, Schurr MJ, Buchanan K, Morici L, McCracken

Could spaceﬂight-assoeiated immune system weakening J , Porter MD, Pierson DL, Smith SM, Mergeay M, Leys N,

preclude the expansion of human presence beyond Earth's Stefanyshyn-Piper HM, Gorie D, and CA. Nickerson.

0rbit?JLeukOCBi0186:1027-1038. 2008. Media ion content inhibits Spaceﬂight-induced
increases in microbial virulence. PLOS ONE.

Klaus, D.M., and Howard, H.N. 2006. Antibiotic efﬁcacy 2008;3(12):e3923.

and microbial Virulence during space ﬂight. Trends

Biotechn0124: 131-136.

Nauman, E., Ott, C.M., Saunders, E., Tucker, D, Pierson,

D., Wilson, J.W., and CA. Nickerson. 2007. A Novel

Quantitative Biosystem to Model Physiological Fluid

Shear Stress 011 Cells. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.

Feb;73(3):699-705.

Nickerson, C. A., Ott, M., Mister, S.J., Morrow, B.J.,

Burns-Keliher, L., and Pierson, D.L. 2000. MicrograVity as

a novel environmental signal affecting Salmonella enterica

serovar Typhimurium Virulence. Infect. Immun. 6813147-

3152.

Nickerson, C.A., C. M. Ott, J .W. Wilson, and D. L.

Pierson. 2004. Microbial responses to microgravity and

other low shear environments. (Invited Review)

78 Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010

"
