"","x"
"1","Microbes Environ. V01. 29, N0. 3, 239-242, 2014 @ MICROBES AND
https://www.j stage.j st.g0.jp/br0wse/j sme2 doi:10.1264/jsme2.ME2903rh ENVIRONMENTS
Research Highlight
Space Habitation and Microbiology: Status and Roadmap of Space Agencies
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION (NASA): MARK OTT1 and DUANE PIERSONI
J APAN AEROSPACE EXPLORATION AGENCY (J AXA): MASAKI SHIRAKAWAZ, FUMIAKI TANIGAKI2, MASAMITSU HIDA2,
TAKASHI YAMAZAKI2’3, TORU SHIMAZU4, and NORIAKI ISHIOKA5*
1Human Health and Performance, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 1 601,
NASA Parkway, Houston, Texas 77058, USA; 2Space Environment Utilization Center, Human Spaceﬂight Mission Directorate,
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), 2—1—1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305—8505, Japan; 3Lab0mt0ry ofSpace and
Environmental Medicine, Graduate School ofMedicine, Teikyo University, 359, Ohtsuka, Hachiohji, Tokyo 192—0395, Japan;
4Japan Space F 0mm, 3—2—1, Kandasurugadai, Chiyoda, Tokyo 101—0062, Japan; and Slnstitute ofSpace and Astronautical
Science, Japan Space Exploration Agency (JAM), 3—1—1 Yoshinodai, Chuo-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252—5210, Japan
Microbiological research and operational efforts at the COUld itnpact the health and performance Of the crew during
N A S A a spaceﬂight m1ss10n. In order to achieve its goals, the NASA
Human Research Program performs ground-based and space-
The ubiquitous nature of microbiology is reﬂected in the ﬂight studies designed to decrease uncertainties in our
diversity of microbiological research and operational efforts knowledge of current risks entitled “Risk of Adverse Health
at NASA. For example, the impact of microorganisms 0n Effects Due to Alterations in Host-Microorganism Inter-
0ther planets and the protection of Earth from the potential of actions”. Details on the content of this research can be found at
microbial life elsewhere is the responsibility of the Ofﬁce of http://humanresearchr0admap.nasa.g0V/Risks/?i=80. An exam-
Planetary Protection (http://p1anetarypr0tecti0n.nasa.gOV/ ple of studies being performed in this program is the spaceﬂight
about). While the Ofﬁce of Planetary Protection does not experiment, a study on the impact of long-term space travel
include forward or back contamination to or from a low on the astronaut’s microbiome, led by Principal Investigator
Earth orbit, research platforms, such as the 188, are being Dr. Hernan Lorenzi 0f the J Craig Venter Institute. This
used to better understand the survival of microorganisms study has been designed to evaluate changes in the astronaut
and corresponding contamination control in the extreme microbiome that may be occurring during spaceﬂight
conditions of space (2, 4, 10). Another example is the NASA missions, Which could impact their health and performance.
Center for Astrobiology, Which focuses on the origin, evolu- This experiment Will use state-of—the-art techniques to de-
tion, distribution, and future of life in the universe (https:// termine ﬂuctuations in the bacterial and Viral microbiome
astrobiology.nasa.g0V/). The large focus on microbiology is of astronauts from key body sites before, during, and after a
Within its human exploration operations. NASA has histori- space mission. In addition, key immunological and environ-
cally set microbiological requirements, including stringent mental parameters Will be monitored.
monitoring regimes, to mitigate risks to the health and perfor-
mance of astrenauts. Microorganisms can have both positive Microbiology researc h in the N A S A Space Biology Program
and negative impacts on many aspects of human spaceﬂight,
including the risk and prevention of infectious diseases, The NASA Space Biology Program performs basic
performance of Environmental Control and Life Support microbiological research, including both ground-based and
Systems (ECLSS), spaceﬂight foods, and vehicle design and spaceﬂight studies, Which enhances our understanding of
integrity. Even though a great amount of information has microorganisms and their unique responses to spaceﬂight
been obtained (1, 5, 7, 8), several key questions regarding the culture. The broad scope of microbiology research by the
impact of microorganisms on human spaceﬂight still remain. NASA Space Biology Program can be found in the
Research into the uncertainties of risks that may affect creW Fundamental Space Biology Science Plan at http://WWW.
health are the responsibility of the NASA Human Research nasa.gOV/exploration/library/esmd_documents.htInl. An exam-
Program (http://WWW.nasa.gOV/eXploration/humanreseareh/). ple of this research is the spaceﬂight experiment, an investi-
The research that addresses our fundamental understanding gation of host-pathogen interactions, conserved cellular
of space life science and its translation for beneﬁts to the responses, and countermeasure efﬁcacies during spaceﬂight
general public on Earth is the responsibility of NASA Space using the human surrogate model Caenorhabditis elegans,
Biology. led by Principal Investigator Dr. Cheryl Nickerson 0f the
Microbial research by the NASA Human Research Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University. This study
Program has investigated changes in microbial hazards, in- builds upon Dr. Nickerson’s previous ﬁndings that Salmonella
fectious disease: dose-responses, and crew exposure that enterica serovar Typhimurium displayed increases in Viru-
lence When cultured during spaceﬂight. In this latest experi-
* Corresponding author.E-mai1: ishioka.n0riaki@jaxa.jp; Inent, changes in Virulence and genetic regulation are being
Tel: +81—50—3362—6072; Fax: +8142—759-8808. evaluated When both the host and pathogen are simultane-

"
"2","240 OTT et al.
ously exposed to the spaceﬂight environment. In addition to 4A ». g _, . L [ \ ‘ "" .:- j“ '7
inﬂight monitoring of the infection process, this study will \V/R‘ W‘ 7k: ' J? “E?“ ff“ ."" ' _
also evaluate the impact of altering media components to 7::;33;""\1‘-.,\V_J- :ilg\§g§“‘ A 1?; 1 i j ‘ .
better deﬁne the mechanisms underlying this spaceﬂight 4‘“2Q "" \ﬂ‘ \‘ '1 “‘5 ~ ’LJ‘ 3;- “ ‘ :1 \
effect. \ "":9! J \ —'- r ' _‘ / 2‘ .41“ 3' 7 “‘3;
The need for microbiology in NASA’s research goals was ‘ ~71 ' ‘ A -‘:“""‘_“'4‘-» 3:;
reinforced by the National Academy of Sciences in their 2011 , “\7 L?) ’ w '5' ~ ‘
report, “Recapturing a Future for Space Exploration: Life and "" ' ""mew 4 -~ "" 1 v, ""
Physical Sciences Research for a New Bra” (6), commonly ’4‘ ~ 3‘ — /
referred to as the Decadal Survey. Included in their recom- ‘- ﬂ,
mendations was the need to: ‘ . , -_..__3 ~ l\ ”
1. Establish a “Microbial Observatory” program on the :‘JM- ‘ ""‘1
ISS, , - 9-1“
2. Establish research analyzing microbial growth and . 1 17.7 [31> /./ ‘
physiological responses to the spaceﬂight environment, and .. - ,1 ,3” i '
3. Develop research aimed at investigating microbial-plant m U U u: I .-
systems in long-term life support systems. .-
These recommendations have established the groundwork .q i .' ""‘l‘.
for future microbiological research, which intersects with 2 I. 452%.
multiple NASA programs. NASA research will continue to ‘ ab ff 3’
provide exciting new ﬁndings and create opportunities for B‘VQT ‘- ‘71;
greater collaborations and utilization of the International ‘ ' '
Space Statlon (ISS) platform. MOS‘ lmpgrtantly,.the knowl- Fig. 1. (A) Typical sampling location inside the Kibo module for
edge ga1ned from StUdleS’ suCh as the Mlcmblal ObserV- “Microbe-l, 2, 3” experiments. (B) Air sampling with the NASA Air
atory” initiative, hold the potential to improve the health and Sampler Device (left) and JAXA Particle Counter (right) in the
performance of spaceﬂight crews and translate into important MiCI‘Obe-3 experiment-
ﬁndings for scientists on Earth.
2. In order to monitor microbes in the cabin air inside Kibo,
. . . an air sampling deVice and particle counter were used in
Current status ofJapanese mlcroblal study m space “Microbe-3” (Fig. 1B).
The JAXA has solicited research opportunities onboard 3. Collected samples were retrieved and analyzed by
Kibo, and research related to microbial monitoring, as shown molecular and biological analyses.
in Table 1, have been selected. New hardware, a commercial handheld Particle Counter
“Microbe-l” t0 “Microbe-3” are a series of experiments (KR-12A, Rion) that was customized for ﬂight, was intro-
that monitor microbial dynamics in the Kibo module and duced in the “Microbe-3” experiment, (Fig. 1B [right]). This
were initiated just before Kibo was launched. The objective particle counter has the following functions: 1) Detect parti-
of “Microbe” is to constantly monitor the microbes in Kibo cles ﬂoating in the air; 2) Display a particle count for six
that may affect crew members’ health and the ISS systems ranges in size Of 20.5 Mm, 21.0 pm, 22.0 Mm, 23.0 pm, 25 .0
and facilities. Experiment data will be used to evaluate the um, and 210.0 pm; 3) Store up to 500 measurements; 4)
stress caused by microbes 0n crew members as the medical Downlink the data through a laptop terminal in Kibo; 5)
impact of living on a space station. Fig. 1A shows a typical Operate for approximately 30 h with four D-cell alkaline
sampling location inside the Kibo module. The features of batteries. The particle counter was launched by HTV-3 in
“Microbe” are as follows: July, 2012. During the “Microbe-3” experiment and used to
1. Adhesive sheets for microbial detection and collection, count particles in the Kibo module in September—October
and swabs have been used. timeframe, 2012.
Table 1. Microbial monitoring experiments selected by JAXA
Exrliggéent Experiment Title Principle Investigator Status References
Microbe-l Studies on microbiota on board Makimura, K. Microbe-l: Conducted in 2009 (3, 9, 11)
Microbe-2 International Space Station and their (Teikyo Univ.) Microbe-2: Conducted in 2011
Microbe-3 relationship to health problems (combined Nasu, M. Microbe-3: Conducted in 2012
with “Microbial monitoring on the ISS”) (Osaka Univ.)
(selected in 2007)
Microbe-A On-board microorganism monitoring in Yamazaki, T. Experiment deﬁnition ongoing http://iss.j axa.jp/en/kiboexp/
spacecrafts (selected in 2010) (Teikyo UniV./JAXA) theme/second/pmlatter/
yamazaki_e.pdf
Microbe-4 “Microbe”: Microbial monitoring in the Nasu, M. Experiment deﬁnition ongoing http://iss.j axa.jp/en/kiboexp/
International Space Station—KIBO (Osaka Univ.) scenario/selection/fy2014_
(selected in 2012) general/

"
"3","Microbial Research at NASA and JAXA 241
Air samples were also collected at the same time using the ecosystems; space immunology research aimed at main-

NASA Air Sampling Device (ASD) for the SWAB project, taining healthy life in space; opportunistic infections origi-

which was borrowed from NASA (Fig. 1B [1eft]). JAXA nating from the herpes Virus or stress; and Viruses related to

fabricated a newly designed battery holder for the SWAB fatigue

ASD. 2. Probiotios, which actively use microbes in the space

On-going rnicrobialrnonitoring in KIBO will be continued environment, will be a promising area in the future, e.g.
and expanded in the “Miorobe-4” experiment. The objective metagenomio research of enterio bacterial ﬂora from a lactic
of “Miorobe-4” is to accumulate fundamental data on micro- fermenting beverage or food intake is expected to contribute
bia1 dynamics in space habitation environments in order to to the maintenance of astronaut hea1th.
deﬁne correct upper and lower thresholds for the indoor 3. Biostimulation research on the application of producing
environmental quality control of air, water, and surfaces in food using excrement in space and the prevention of a
this unique habitat. depressed immune system will be necessary.

Onboard microbial monitoring systems are planned for use 4. Examples of the application and improvement targets
in the “Miorobe-A” experiment. These devices will not are relaxation during a long-term mission; air-oleaning tech-
require sample recovery to the ground and will allow crew nology; production capacity; measurement of photosynthetic
members to evaluate risks and impact promptly onboard abi1ity using oyanobaoteria; a comparison experiment of the
Kibo. The purpose of “Miorobe-A” is to develop and dernon- absorption of carbon dioxide and the oxygen evolution effect
strate a rapid and effective onboard monitoring system for on the ground; and development of fundamental technology
crew members to monitor microorganisms in the ISS cabin for a new enclosed life support system.
environment. On-site and rea1-tirne microbial monitoring
systems Wm be developed to protect crew rnernbers frorn Future international cooperation ofJAXA and other space
harmful microorganisms. Crew members Will be able to a g e n (31' es
monitor microﬂora in their living environment on-orbit and
immediately take countermeasures against microbial contarn- The International Space Station program is one of the
ination. The development of onboard monitoring facilities biggest international cooperative projects in the world.
based on ground-based microbial monitoring technologies Onboard research should also be promoted by international
has been studied. Candidates are Loop-Mediated Isothermal collaborations. This collaboration will be necessary, espe-
Arnpliﬁcation (oalled“LAMP”; http://looparnp.eiken.oo.jp/e/ cia11y for microbial research, because the cabin or internal
teoh/indeX.htrn1) and a ﬂuorescent microsoope-based system environment inside the 188 is common and the environment
for enumeration with a newly designed microﬂuidio device will mutually affect each agency’s module, facilities, and
for cell counting (12). onboard crew members. However, although microbial enVi-

ronment conditions are commonly assessed in terms of
Futureprospects ofmicrobial research in ISS/Kibo rnedioal operations (116. a minimum screening 1eye1)., micro-
bial research to support or advance these aot1V1t1es (6g.

The JAXA president’s advisory committee to promote the validation of the current threshold) have so far been con-
uti1ization of ISS/Kibo developed “Kibo utilization scenarios ducted individually by each space agency. Therefore, JAXA
(strategic plans) toward 2020” in March 2012. These soenar- has proposed the following possible international collabora-
ios were developed in the disciplines of life sciences, space tions or activities to the other international partners.
medicine, and physical sciences (http://iss.jaxa.jp/en/kiboeXp/ 1. Sharing of microbial observation data or samples is
soenario/). Future microbial research in the scenario for life important for enabling various analyses by international
sciences has been described as follows: “A priority item is research communities or agencies after the Primary Investi-
‘Research on the relationship between microbes and humans gator’s speciﬁc analyses have been completed. Compiling
in space’. The 188 is a completely closed environment that data as a database and framework for exchanging information
offers a long-term microgravity enVironrnent. Therefore, it is on a regular basis should also be considered.

a unique environment in which microbes can move and attach 2. Monitoring of other modules to expand the entire 188 is
themselves to devices or humans (especially the exposed part necessary for spatial comparisons (6g. J apanese Kibo vs.
of the body and head). Monitoring microbes inside Kibo and Russian Service Module) of data. If data are exchanged, the
analyzing their movement must be continued to study their sampling frequency rate in one module can increase.

inﬂuence on humans and to prevent health hazards caused by 3. The standardization of protocols or measures for moni-
these microbes during a long-term space mission. In addition, toring is necessary to deﬁne uniﬁed upper and lower thresh-
an integrated monitoring and analysis system needs to be olds and the microbiological quality control of air, water, and
established in cooperation with NASA (USA), ESA (EU), surfaces. This activity may lead to the establishment of
and ROSCOSMOS (Russia), not only for inside Kibo, but effective measures for 188 operations (6g. reduce crew time
also the entire 188.” for housekeeping by oonoentrated/prioritized cleaning).

The scenario also states that the following area should be JAXA has proposed that JAXA or J apanese investigators can
promoted: provide the sampling devices used in our experiments for this

1. Research on the relationship between humans and purpose.
microbes should be promoted in the future as space rnioro- 4. The development of rea1-tirne and on-site monitoring
biology, e.g. evaluation of the integral effects of microgravity systems is necessary to reduce returned samples. This system
or space radiation; propagation of cell genes as microbial is also required to evaluate the microbial status onboard the

"
"4","242 OTT et al.
ISS in a timely manner. 6. National Research Council. 2011. Recapturing a Future for Space
J AX A expects that microbial 1.eseamh 0n the ISS/Kibo Exploration: Life and Physical Sciences Research for a New Era. The
. . . National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
IS also beneﬁelal 0n the ground such as the estabhshment 7_ Nickerson, C.A., CM. Ott, J.W. Wilson, R. Ramamurthy, and
of a process to monitor an environment that requires speciﬁc D.L. Pierson 2004. Microbial responses to microgravity and other
quality control9 the spin_0ff 0f handy9 reliable devices (level- leW-Shear environments. Microbiol. M01. B101. RCV. 68H345—361 .
oped for space experiments, and applications to health and 8‘ giggglﬁig'lﬁu? (:14 1Mécmblal contammatlon Of Spacecraft Gram‘
enVlronmental contml- 9. Satoh, K., Y. Nishiyama, T. Yamazaki, T. Sugita, Y. Tsukii, K.
Takatori, Y. Benno, and K. Makimura. 2011. Microbe-I: fungal
References biota analyses of the Japanese experimental module KIBO of the
International Space Station before launch and after being in orbit for
1. Castro, V.A., R.J. Bruce, M.C. Ott, and D.L. Pierson. 2006. The about 460 days.Micr0bi01. Immunol. 553823—829-
inﬂuence of microbiology 0n spacecraft design and controls: A 10- Vaishampayan, P.A., 13- Rabbow, G- Homeck, and KJ-
historical perspective of the shuttle and International Space Station Venkateswaran. 2012- Survival 0f 3610171515 pumilus spores for a
programs. S AE Tech. Pap. Ser. 7. prolonged period of time in real space conditions. Astrobiol. 12:487—
2. Homeck, G., D.M. Klaus, and R.L. Mancinelli. 2010. Space micro— 497-
biology.Microbi01. M01.Bi01.ReV. 74:121—156. 11. Yamaguchi, N., H. Hieda, and M. Nasu. 2010. Simple and reliable
3. Ichijo, T., H. Hieda, R. Ishihara, N. Yamaguchi, and M. Nasu. 2013. swabbing procedure for monitoring microbes in the International
Bacterial monitoring with adhesive sheet in the International Space Space Station. Eco—Engineering 22327—30-
Station-“Kibo”, the Japanese Experiment Module. Microbes Environ. 12- Yamaguchi, N., M- Torii, Y- Uebayashi, and M- Nasu. 2011- Rapid,
28: 264—268. semiautomated quantiﬁcation of bacterial cells in freshwater by using
4. Kawaguchi, Y., Y. Yang, N. Kawashiri, er al. 2013. The possible a microﬂuidic device for on-ship staining and counting. Appl.
interplanetary transfer of microbes: assessing the Viability of Environ. MiCTObiOI- 771536—1539-
Deinococcus spp. under the 188 Environmental conditions for
performing exposure experiments of microbes in the Tanpopo
mission. Orig. Life. EV01. Biosph. 43:411—428.
5. Klaus, D.M., and H.N. Howard. 2006. Antibiotic efﬁcacy and micro-
bial Virulence during space ﬂight. Trends Biotechnol. 24:131—136.

"
