"","x"
"1","Midodrine as a Countermeasure t0 Orthostatic Hypotension
Immediately after Space Shuttle Landing

Steven H. Platts, 13th

Michael B. Stenger, PhD2

L. Christine Ribeiro, Ms2
Stuart M.C. Lee, Ms2

1NASA J ohnson Space Center, Houston, TX
2Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering Group, Houston, TX

"
"2","ABSTRACT
Midodrine prevents post-space ﬂight orthostatic intolerance when testing is conducted in
a controlled laboratory setting within 2-4 hours after Space Shuttle landing. It is
unknown if midodrine is as effective during re-entry and immediately following landing.
METHODS: Cardiovascular responses to 10 minutes of 80° head-up tilt in ﬁve male
astronauts were compared before and immediately after Space Shuttle missions. Pre-
ﬂight tests were conducted in the J ohnson Space Center Cardiovascular Laboratory
without midodrine. Post-ﬂight testing was performed in the Crew Transport Vehicle on
the Space Shuttle runway within 60 minutes of landing; midodrine was self-administered
before re-entry. Survival analysis was performed (Gehan-Breslow test) to compare
presyncope rates pre- to post-ﬂight. Cardiovascular responses (last minute standing
minus supine) to tilt before and after space ﬂight were compared using paired t-tests.
RESULTS: Midodrine did not prevent post-ﬂight orthostatic hypotension in two of the
ﬁve astronauts, but the rate of presyncope across the group did not increase (p=0.17)
ﬁ'om pre- to post-ﬂight. Also, although the change in heart rate from supine to the last
minute of standing was not affected by space ﬂight, systolic blood pressure decreased
more (p=0.05) and diastolic blood pressure tended to decrease (p=0.08) after space ﬂight.
CONCLUSIONS: Accurate interpretation of the current results requires that similar data
be collected in control subjects (without midodrine) on the CTV. However, drug
interaction concerns with commonly used anti-emetics and potentiation of prolonged QTc
intervals observed in long duration astronauts make the routine use of midodrine for
immediate post-ﬂight orthostatic hypotension unlikely.

2

"
"3","INTRODUCTION
Following space ﬂight, the capability to remain upright (standing) may be compromised
by an inability to maintain adequate arterial pressure and cerebral perfusion. This
condition, teimed orthostatic or postural hypotension, may result in presyncope
(lightheadedness) or syncope (loss of consciousness) during re-entry or egress ﬁ'om the
space vehicle and for several days after landing. A signiﬁcant number of astronauts
experience post-ﬂight orthostatic hypotension, and its severity and incidence increases as
the length of microgravity exposure is extended. Approximately 20% of short-duration
and 80% of long-duration crewmembers experience presyncope during testing on landing
day (15). We expect that orthostatic hypotension also will be a signiﬁcant concern
following exploration class space ﬂight missions when medical assistance will be limited
or even unavailable. The development of an effective countermeasure may be critical to
the success of these missions, and post-ﬂight orthostatic hypotension is listed as a high
priority in the HHC Integrated Research Plan (Gap CV3).
To date, the potential countermeasures that have been tested (e.g., lower body negative
pressure, ﬂuid loading, Floﬁnef, exercise) have not eliminated post-ﬂight orthostatic
hypotension. Midodrine is a selective alpha-l adrenergic agonist Which is used clinically
to treat orthostatic hypotension. It is almost completely absorbed after oral
administration and is hydrolyzed enzymatically to its active metabolite, desglymidodrine,
which has a bioavailability of 93% (11; 13);(14). Midodrine acts by increasing
vasoconstriction and decreases peripheral venous capacity, prevents blood pooling, and
increases total peripheral resistance (14), but does not pass the blood-brain barrier and

3

"
"4","therefore has no central stimulant effects (13). The effects of midodrine may be
particularly protective of orthostatic tolerance in astronauts who become presyncopal on
landing day due to inadequate release of norepinephrine (9).
Midodrine as a countermeasure to orthostatic intolerance was evaluated in two phases.
In Phase I, 10 mg of midodrine was given orally to astronauts two hours after the landing
of a Space Shuttle mission and one hour prior to an 80° head-up tilt test administered in
NASA’s data collection facility at the landing site. In ﬁve male astronauts, heart rate
during upn'ght tilt was not signiﬁcantly elevated compared to preﬂight with midodrine
administration. Other hemodynamic responses to tilt were not different than pre-ﬂight,
and no crewmember expen'enced hypertension after consuming this adrenergic agonist.
Importantly, heart rate was signiﬁcantly greater in these crewmembers following a
previous mission of similar duration when they had not taken the drug (17). Additionally,
orthostatic intolerance was prevented in one female crewmember during ti1t aﬁer taking
midodrine following a Space Shuttle mission even though she had become presyncopal
dun'ng a stand test of similar duration following a previous Space Shuttle ﬂight (18).
In Phase II, midodrine was administered to crewmembers in the manner in which it might
be used routinely following space ﬂight. Midodrine was administered to ﬁve male
astronauts one hour before landing, near the time of ﬁring the Shuttle main engines to
decelerate the Orbiter and begin its descent. The peak therapeutic effect of midodrine
occurs approximately one hour after ingestion (18);(10);(25), making it particularly
attractive as landing day countermeasure, such that its peak effect is close to the time of
4

"
"5","the maximum gravitational forces during landing (17). The purpose of this report is to
summarize the preliminary ﬁndings from Phase II of this countermeasure evaluation.
The strength of this study is that crewmembers participated in the post-ﬂight tilt test of
orthostatic tolerance within 30 minutes after wheelstop such that their physical status
more closely represented their condition during re-entry and immediately upon landing.
METHODS
Overall Protocol
Eight crewmembers volunteered to participate in this countermeasure evaluation. Three
subjects withdrew ﬁ'om participation following the collection of pre-ﬂight data. Two
subj ects were waived from participation: one demonstrated a prolonged QTc interval on
an electrocardiogram during in-ﬂight screening and one experienced signiﬁcant
neurovestibular disturbances on landing day. One crewmember voluntarily withdrew
ﬁ'om participation following the pre-ﬂight midodrine tolerance test.
In the course of this study, countermeasure subjects participated in a familiarization
session and drug tolerance test, an 80° head-up tilt test without medications
approximately 10 days before launch (L-10), and the tilt test protocol within 60 minutes
of Shuttle landing (R+0). Protocols were reviewed and approved by the Committee for
the Protection of Human Subjects at NASA-Johnson Space Center (J SC). Subjects
received verbal and written explanation of all procedures and signed statements of
informed consent prior to participation.

5

"
"6","Preflight Activities
Approximately 90 days before the scheduled launch date, subj ects were briefed on test
protocols and procedures. Afterwards, crewmembers participated in a midodrine
tolerance test. A 12-1ead electrocardiogram was ﬁrst obtained to insure that the
crewmember’s QTc interval was within acceptable limits for ingestion of midodrine
(<0.45 sec for men, <0.47 sec for women). Once veriﬁed, the crewmember’s baseline
systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) was measured. Following the
ingestion of 10 mg midodrine, blood pressure was monitored at regular intervals during
normal activities for four hours by trained personnel using a manual sphygmomanometer.
Crewmembers were requested to report any unusual experiences or symptoms during this
four-hour monitoring period and completed an activity 10g.
Approximately 10 days before launch (L—lO), crewmembers participated in a tilt test in
the J SC Cardiovascular Laboratory. Six minutes of supine data were collected prior to
tilting the subjects to 80° head-up tilt using an automatic tilt table. The subjects remained
in this position for 10 minutes, or until symptoms of orthostatic hypotension (SBP<70
mmHg, sudden drop in heart rate>15 beats'min'l, sudden drop in SBP> 25 mmHg,
sudden drop in DBP>15 mmHg, bradyarrythmia) and/or presyncope occurred (severe
nausea, clammy skin, perﬁlse sweating, pallor, light-headedness, dizziness, or tingling).
Subj ects were discouraged from movement, muscle contractions, talking (except to report
symptoms), and were encouraged to breathe normally. Subj ects were returned to the
supine posture upon termination of the test protocol.

6

"
"7","Subjects were instrumented to measure ECG (Escort II, MDE, Arleta, CA) for heart rate
(HR) and rhythm, beat-to-beat blood pressure in the ﬁnger (Finapres 2300 blood pressure
monitor, Ohmeda, Englewood, CO), and blood pressure each minute in the brachial
artery (Dinamap XL Vital Signs Monitor, GE Medical Systems Information
Technologies, Milwaukee, WI). Two-dimensional echocardiography was used to obtain
the aortic annulus diameter ﬁ'om the parasternal long axis during supine rest prior to data
collection. Ascending aortic blood velocity time integral was measured each beat during
rest and tilt ﬁ'om pulse wave Doppler measurements made at the suprasternal notch using
a 2 MHz probe (Biosound MyLab 30, Esoate, Indianapolis, IN) (3). Images were
digitally stored for ofﬂine analysis. Images ﬁ'om three cardiac cycles collected at a time
corresponding to the heart rate and blood pressure data were independently analyzed by
two experienced sonographers. Sonographers were blinded to the test conditions during
the analyses. Stroke volume (SV=annu1us diameter x velocity time integral), cardiac
output (CO=stroke volume x heart rate) and total peripheral resistance (TPR=mean
arterial pressure/cardiac output) were calculated.
In F light Activities
Crewmembers participated in their scheduled in-ﬂight activities without restriction for
the duration of their Shuttle mission. After the decision for deorbit burn was conﬁrmed
on the scheduled landing day, crewmembers donned the Advanced Crew Escape Suit
(ACES) and ingested 10 mg of midodrine approximately one hour prior to the scheduled
landing time. The midodrine pill and a cue card with medication instructions were
stowed previously in the astronaut’s ACES for their convenience. Crewmembers

7

"
"8","participated in the standard oral ﬂuid loading protocol (equivalent to isotonic saline at a
rate of 15 ml'kg'1 within two hours of landing (18)) and inﬂated their antigravity suits
during re-entry and landing.
Post-ﬂight Activities
Post-ﬂight testing on landing day (R+0) was conducted on the Shuttle runway at either
Kennedy Space Center, FL, or Dryden Flight Research Center, CA, in NASA’s Crew
Transport Vehicle (CTV), a modiﬁed airport “people mover” used to transport the
crewmembers from the Space Shuttle to the data collection facility. Aﬁer Shuttle wheel
stop, the CTV approached the Orbiter with the rest of the NASA convoy, and the Shuttle
hatch was opened within ~20 min. After a brief medical check by the NASA Flight
Surgeons, the crewmembers exited the Orbiter with the midodrine test subj ects exiting
ﬁrst. The crewmember doffed their ACES within 5 min and participated in the same tilt
test protocol as during the pre-ﬂight assessment.
Statistical Analyses
Hemodynamic and heart rate data were collected during the tilt test. The last minute of
supine data was used as baseline. Standing values represent the data at the end of the tilt
test: either after 10 minutes of tilt or when symptoms of orthostatic hypotension
(presyncope) intervened.
Survival analysis was performed using the Gehan-Breslow test to compare the rate of
presyncope during tilt at L-10 in the J SC Cardiovascular Laboratory and during tilt on

8

"
"9","R+0 when testing was performed on the CTV. Because of the small number of subjects
in this study, inferential statistics should be Viewed with caution. Paired t-tests were
conducted to determine whether there was a signiﬁcant change in the heart rate and
hemodynamic variables from supine to the last minute of tilt within each day. Then,
paired t-tests were performed to compare the heart rate and hemodynamic responses (last
minute standing minus supine) to tilt before and after space ﬂight. Heart rate and blood
pressure data were available for all ﬁve subjects on L-10 and R+0. However, SV, CO,
and TPR data were not available for two subjects on R+0. Therefore, no inferential
statistics were performed with these data.
Mean differences were considered signiﬁcant if p S 0.05. Statistical analysis was
performed using the software package SigmaPlot for Windows, version 11.0 (Systat
Soﬁware, Inc.). Data are presented as means i: SEM.
RESULTS
On L-10, all ﬁve subjects completed the ﬁlll 10 minutes of 80° head-up tilt in the
laboratory without developing signs or symptoms of presyncope. When testing was
performed in the CTV 0n R+0, only three of the ﬁve crewmembers completed the full 10
minutes of tilt. In this small group of subjects, the rate at which pre-syncope developed
was not different (p=0.17) between testing in the laboratory on L-10 and testing on the
CTV 0n R+0 (FIGURE 1).
INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

9

"
"10","HR increased from supine to tilt (TABLE I) both on L-10 (20i2 beats-min'l, p<0.001)
and on R+0 (25i9 beats-min'l, p=0.05), but the change in HR from supine to tilt was not
different ﬁ'om L-10 to R+0 (p=0.55, FIGURE 2). In contrast, SBP did not signiﬁcantly
change ﬁ'om supine to tilt either on L-10 (+3i5 mmHg, p=0.62) or on R+0 (-27i15
mmHg, p=0.15); however, the change in SBP from supine to tilt was different from L-10
to R+0 (p=0.05). DBP increased ﬁ'om supine to tilt on L-10 (+7i2 mmHg, p=0.03), but
DBP did not change ﬁ'om supine to tilt on R+0 (-12i8 mmHg, p=0.21). Similar to SBP,
the change in DBP from supine to tilt tended to be different on R+0 than L-10 than on L-
10 (p=0.08).
Supine and tilt echocardiographic data were not statistically tested but are displayed in
Table I.
INSERT TABLE I HERE
INSERT FGURE 2 HERE
DISCUSSION
This study represents the conclusion of Phase II of testing of midodrine as a
phannacological countermeasure to post-space ﬂight orthostatic intolerance. The unique
aspects of this investigation were that (a) this was the ﬁrst time that a medication had
been administered immediately prior to Space Shuttle re-entry and landing to protect

10

"
"11","against orthostatic intolerance and (b) this was the ﬁrst time that tilt tests were conducted
on the CTV as an opportunity to examine orthostatic responses immediately after
landing. In these ﬁve crewmembers, the rate of presyncope was not increased from pre-
ﬂight without midodrine to post-ﬂight with midodrine. However, although the HR
response to tilt was not changed ﬁ'om pre- to post-ﬂight, midodrine did not prevent a drop
in a blood pressure after space ﬂight. Unfortunately, because of the unique operational
aspects of this study, there were no control data (without midodrine) collected on the
CTV to which comparisons could be made and conclusions drawn.
Post-ﬂight orthostatic hypotension is one of the consequences of cardiovascular
adaptations to microgravity that negatively impacts crew safety (1);(2);(6);(7);(9). Some
crewmembers are so affected that they require assistance when exiting the Shuttle.
Susceptibility to orthostatic hypotension is individual, with some astronauts experiencing
severe symptoms, while others are less affected (8). Presyncopal astronauts, who exhibit
severe orthostatic hypotension, have signiﬁcantly lower standing plasma norepinephrine
levels and total peripheral resistance than their crew mates who do not become
presyncopal (9). These symptoms resemble those seen in patients with orthostatic
hypotension due to autonomic dysﬁlnction (9);(13).
Midodrine has proven to be a very safe and effective therapy for orthostatic hypotension
due to autonomic dysfunction (5); (11);(13);(14);(20);(22);(24). In a randomized,
double-blind, multicenter study with 171 patients with neurogenic orthostatic
hypotension, Midodrine (10 mg dose, 3 times per day) resulted in substantial increases in
1 1

"
"12","standing systolic blood pressure (increase of 22 mm Hg) with corresponding reductions
in subjective symptoms such as lightheadedness over patients given placebo (13). In a
second study, midodrine improved the following orthostatic hypotension symptoms:
dizziness/lightheadedness, weakness/fatigue, syncope, low energy level, impaired ability
to stand, and feelings of depression (11). The usual dose of midodrine is 5-10 mg orally
three times a day (22);(24). When given to healthy subjects, midodrine only modestly
increases supine and standing arterial pressure (increases less than 10 mm Hg) and
decreases heart rate (less than 10 bpm) (5);(14).
The National Space Biomedical Research Institute’s Cardiovascular Alterations Team
conducted a two-week head-down bed-rest study (an analogue of space-ﬂight) in normal
human volunteers to simulate the effects of weightlessness on the cardiovascular system
(19). They tested midodrine as a countermeasure for the post-bedrest orthostatic
hypotension commonly observed during tilt testing. Five mg of midodrine signiﬁcantly
increased blood pressure and reduced fainting during post-bed rest tilt tests. The
investigators concluded that midodrine might be an effective countermeasure for the
prevention of orthostatic intolerance in astronauts following spaceﬂight.
For these reasons, we evaluated midodrine as a countermeasure to orthostatic intolerance
aﬁer space ﬂight. Because there were concerns about the safety of performing these
studies in astronauts during re-entry and landing, the implementation took place in two
phases. In Phase I, midodrine was administered to crewmembers after space ﬂight, and
testing was conducted in the controlled environment of the laboratory at the landing sites.
12

"
"13","The primary ﬁnding of this experiment was that orthostatic responses in ﬁve male
crewmembers after a Space Shuttle mission were not different than that which they
experienced pre-ﬂight. Additionally, their post-ﬂight HR response with midodrine was
less than the post-ﬂight HR response following a previous Space Shuttle mission, and
midodrine did not cause hypertension (17). Further, the administration of midodrine
appeared to have prevented orthostatic intolerance after an 11-day mission in one female
astronaut who had become presyncopal during a tilt test administered following a
previous ﬂight of nine days (18).
However, the second phase of this study examined the efﬁcacy of midodrine immediately
upon landing, in a less controlled and more provocative environment, onboard the CTV.
This type of operationally-relevant environment was necessary to determine the true
efficacy of midodrine as a countermeasure to immediate post-spaceﬂight orthostatic
hypotension. The actual effectiveness of midodrine in this environment is unknown; it is
not known how a crewmember would react to an orthostatic challenge immediately aﬁer
landing without a countermeasure. Temperatures onboard the CTV were above 80°F in
some cases, and the rocking of the vehicle further confounded the results of the tilt test.
For example, elevated body temperature, secondary to increased ambient temperature
(21) and impaired thermoregulation after space ﬂight (4);(12), will result in decreased
orthostatic tolerance (23). The most similar control group, astronauts tested in the
baseline data collection facility after spaceﬂight, has two to four hours of upright
ambulation in which to re-acclimate to Earth’s gravity environment. Furthermore, these
1 3

"
"14","crewmembers have the opportunity to eat and consume additional ﬂuids before testing in
a laboratory setting.
Hazards of Use osz'dodrine
There is no central nervous system or cardiac stimulation with midodrine. The most
frequent side-effect is pilomotor reactions (skin crawling sensation) in <8% of patients.
Other less ﬁ'equently reported side-effects are nausea, heartburn, dizziness, restlessness,
and reﬂex bradycardia. Some reﬂex bradycardia may occur when BP is increased. Risk
mitigation steps involve a drug tolerance test for each individual before its use during
space ﬂight, Which we conducted for this experiment. Possible drug interactions also
include the following: alpha- or beta—adrenergic agonists or blocking agents, especially
digitalis glycosides; sodium-retaining corticosteroids; or vasoconstricting medications.
Subjects were instructed not to take any of these drugs with midodrine before (drug
tolerance test) and after space ﬂight (landing day).
In addition, a drug interaction may exist with promethazine. There is the potential that
midodrine and promethazine will interact when given together. In subjects that have
received both of these medicines, in a previous study performed by our laboratory, we
noted changes in mood and increased restlessness (16). The subjects described feelings of
“anxiety”, “aggressiveness”, “claustrophobia”, and a “need to constantly shift about”.
These changes in mood and restlessness were noticed about 10 minutes aﬁer subjects
received an intravenous dose of promethazine and had been given midodrine one hour
prior. Symptoms resolved within 30 to 45 minutes, and no lasting effects in mood or
14

"
"15","restlessness were reported or observed in these subjects. If midodrine were to be
eventually used as part of the preventive care in subj ects known to have a propensity
towards orthostatic hypotension, it could not be administered in those crewmembers in
whom promethazine was administered before landing, while in the CTV or at the baseline
data collection facility. Based upon our previous experiences in the laboratory, we
recommend that no promethazine may be administered within 70 hours prior to
midodrine ingestion or within 4 hours following midodrine ingestion.
Summary
Midodrine appears to prevent orthostatic intolerance in test subjects aﬁer bed rest and in
astronauts following space ﬂight when testing is conducted in a controlled, laboratory
setting within 2-4 hours aﬁer landing. It is unclear at this time whether similar effects
can expected during re-entry and immediately following landing, particularly in warmer
environments and/or when the crewmembers are still wearing the ACES. Accurate
interpretation of the current data require similar data be collected in control subj ects
(without midodrine) 0n the CTV. However, concerns with drug interactions with
commonly used commonly used anti-emetics and prolonged QTc intervals observed in
long duration astronauts make the routine use of midodrine unlikely and reliance upon
lower body compression garments preferential.
Acknowiedgments
The authors of the report which to thank the crewmembers for their participation in this
investigation; the staff of the J SC Cardiovascular Laboratory for the collection and

1 5

"
"16","reduction of these data; the NASA Flight Surgeons for their support and assistance; and
the Non-Exercise Countermeasures Proj ect at NASA J ohnson Space Center for their
ﬁnancial support.

1 6

"
"17","Reference List

1. Bungo MW, Charles JB and Johnson PC, Jr. Cardiovascular deconditioning
during space ﬂight and the use of saline as a countermeasure to orthostatic
intolerance. Aviat Space Environ Med 56: 985-990, 1985.

2. Charles JB, Bungo MW and Fortner GW. Cardiovascular function. In: Space
Physiology and Medicine, edited by Nicogossian AE, Huntoon CL and Pool SL.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1994, p. 286-304.

3. Childs C, Goldring S, Tann W and Hillier VF. Suprasternal Doppler ultrasound
for assessment of stroke distance. Arch Dis Child 79: 251-255, 1998.

4. Crandall CG, Johnson JM, Convertino VA, Raven PB and Engelke KA.
Altered thermoregulatory responses after 15 days of head-down tilt. J Appl Physiol
77: 1863-1867, 1994.

5. Ehringer H. [Study of human peripheral hemodynamics after i.v. infusion of a
small dosage of d1-1-(2',5'-dimethoxypheny1)—2-g1ycinamidoethanol-(1)
hydrochloride (=st 1085)]. Int Z Klin Pharmakol Ther T oxikol 4: 415-420, 1971.

6. Fritsch-Yelle, J . M. and Brown, T. E. Hypoadrenergic responses to standing aﬁer
spaceﬂight. AIAA , 3-4. 1996.

Ref Type: Abstract
17

"
"18","7. Fritsch-Yelle JM, Charles JB, Jones MM, Beightol LA and Eckberg DL.
Spaceﬂight alters autonomic regulation of arterial pressure in humans. J Appl
Physiol 77: 1776-1783, 1994.

8. Fritsch-Yelle J M, Charles JB, Jones MM and Wood ML. Microgravity
decreases heart rate and arterial pressure in humans. J Appl Physiol 80: 910-914,

1 996.

9. Fritsch-Yelle JM, Whitson PA, Bondar RL and Brown TE. Subnormal
norepinephn'ne release relates to presyncope in astronauts aﬁer spaceﬂight. J Appl
Physiol 81: 2134-2141, 1996.

10. Grobecker HF and Kees F. Pharmacokinetic parameters and haemodynamic
actions of midodrine in young volunteers. Int Angiol 12: 119-124, 1993.

11. J ankovic J, Gilden JL, Hiner BC, Kaufmann H, Brown DC, Coghlan CH,
Rubin M and Fouad-Tarazi FM. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension: a double-
blind, placebo-controlled study with midodrine. Am J Med 95: 38-48, 1993.

12. Lee SM, Williams WJ and Schneider SM. Role of skin blood ﬂow and sweating
rate in exercise thermoregulation after bed rest. J Appl Physiol 92: 2026-2034,
2002.

1 8

"
"19","13. Low PA, Gilden JL, Freeman R, Sheng KN and McElligott MA. Efﬁcacy of
midodrine vs placebo in neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. A randomized, double-
blind multicenter study. Midodrine Study Group. J Am Med Assoc 277: 1046-1051,
1 997.

14. McTavish D and Goa KL. Midodrine. A review of its pharmacological properties
and therapeutic use in orthostatic hypotension and secondary hypotensive disorders.
Drugs 38: 757-777, 1989.

15. Meck JV, Reyes CJ, Perez SA, Goldberger AL and Ziegler MG. Marked
exacerbation of orthostatic intolerance after long- vs. shOIT-duration spaceﬂight in
veteran astronauts. Psychosom Med 63: 865-873, 2001.

16. Platts SH, Shi SJ and Meck JV. Akathisia With combined use of midodrine and
promethazine. J Am Med Assoc 295: 2000-2001, 2006.

17. Platts SH, Ziegler MG, Waters WW and Meck JV. Hemodynamic effects of
midodrine after spaceﬂight in astronauts without orthostatic hypotension. Aviat
Space Environ Med 77: 429-433, 2006.

18. Platts SH, Ziegler MG, Waters WW, Mitchell BM and Meck JV. Midodrine
prescribed to improve recurrent post-spaceﬂight orthostatic hypotension. Aviat
Space Environ Med 75: 554-556, 2004.

1 9

"
"20","19. Ramsdell CD, Mullen TJ, Sundby GH, Rostoft S, Sheynberg N, Aljuri N, Maa
M, Mukkamala R, Sherman D, Toska K, Yelle J, Bloomﬁeld D, Williams GH
and Cohen RJ. Midodrine prevents orthostatic intolerance associated with
simulated spaceﬂight. J Appl Physiol 90: 2245-2248, 2001.

20. Schirger A, Sheps SG, Thomas JE and Fealey RD. Midodrine. A new agent in
the management of idiopathic orthostatic hypotension and Shy-Drager syndrome.
Mayo Clin Proc 56: 429-433, 1981.

21. Shvartz E and Meyerstein N. Effect of heat and natural acclimatization to heat on
tilt tolerance of men and women. J Appl Physiol 28: 428-432, 1970.

22. Ward CR, Gray J C, Gilroy JJ and Kenny RA. Midodrine: a role in the
management of neurocardiogenic syncope. Heart 79: 45-49, 1998.

23. Wilson TE, Cui J, Zhang R, Witkowski S and Crandall CG. Skin cooling
maintains cerebral blood ﬂow velocity and orthostatic tolerance during tilting in
heated humans. J App! Physiol 93: 85-91, 2002.

24. Wright RA, Kaufmann HC, Perera R, Opfer-Gehrking TL, McElligott MA,
Sheng KN and Low PA. A double-blind, dose-response study of midodn'ne in
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Neurology 51: 120-124, 1998.

20

"
"21","25. Zachariah PK, Bloedow DC, Moyer TP, Sheps SG, Schirger A and Fealey RD.
Phannacodynamics of midodrine, an antihypotensive agent. Clin Pharmacol T her
39: 586-591, 1986.
21

"
"22","FIGURE LEGENDS
FIGURE 1. The probability of completing a 10-minute 80° head-up tilt test in the
laboratory before space ﬂight (L-10, solid line) was not different (p=0.17) than the
probability of completing a tilt test on landing day (R+0, dashed line) in the Crew
Transport Vehicle in ﬁve astronauts.
FIGURE 2. Change in heart rate (HR), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood
pressure (DBP), stroke volume (SV), cardiac output (CO), and total peripheral resistance
(TPR) ﬁ'om last minute of supine rest to the last minute 0fti1t in the laboratory before
ﬂight (L-lO) and on landing day (R+0) in the Crew Transport Vehicle. *Signiﬁcantly
different than L-lO (p<0.05).

22

"
"23","FIGURE 1

12' 1.0
D
[—'
z
i: 0.8 I —
bl)
.S
q.)
3 06 .
9-1 - '
a
O
o
03 0.4
.E‘
E 0.2 _ L-10
8 — R+0
CH

0.0

0 2 4 6 8 10
Stand Time(min)
23

"
"24","FIGURE2
40 10 10
0
30 0
’86 -10 ?o
A
3 E E
a 20 V -20 v —10
M 9.. D-Q
E % m
<1 -30 31
10 —20
—40
*
0 -50 —30
L-10 R+0 L-10 R+0 L-10 R+0
0 0.0 25
—10 -0.5
3 20
—20 »-~ —1.0 a
A .S
E a g) 15
v -30 B -1.5 E
>
m 0
<1 0 E: 10
—40 <1 —2.0 9..
[_.
4 5
-50 —2.5
-60 -3.0 0
L-10 R+0 L-10 R+0 L-10 R+0
24

"
"25","Table I. Hemodynamic variables during the last minute of supine rest and at tilt test
termination. *Signiﬁcantly different than supine.
L-10 R+0
Supine Tilt Supine Tilt
m

Systolic Pressure (mmHg, n=5) 121i6 124i7 131i2 104i15
Diastolic Pressure (mmHg, n=5) 67i4 74:|:4* 762b2 642b8
Stroke Volume (m1, n=3) 69i6 29i4 73i7 29i6
Cardiac Output (L-min'l, n=3) 3.8i0.6 2.3:|:0.4 4.3:|:0.5 2410.1
Total Pen'pheral Resistance

24.9i3.6 42.9i6.1 22.5i2.8 28515.7
(mmHg0L'1-min'1, n=3)

25

"
