"","x"
"1","Mldodrlne as a Countermeasure for
Post-Spacefl I g ht Orthostatlc Hypotensuon
Steven H. Platts, Michael G. Ziegler, University of California, San Diego
Universities Space Research Association Janice M Meck, Johnson Space Center
Up to 30% of astronauts exhibit post-spaeeﬂight 20° + L-10 (10 days before landing)
0rth0static hypotension due to inadequate norepinephrine '0‘ R”?’ mid°drine ('anding day)
release during upright posture following short-duration 3 15°
spaceﬂight. We hypothesized that the (xl-adrenergie ‘Eé
agonist midodrine will be an effective countermeasure g 100 g
for 0rth0statie hypotension, and presyneope because: g
It acts in place of norepinephrine 0n the blood vessels; g 50 ﬁg“)
it does not stimulate the central nervous system; it i
does not stimulate the heart directly; and its peak effect 0
is about 1 hour, so it can be taken at time of ignition 200 :
(TIG) for ﬁring the engines for deorbit. Systolig (tcp)

Diastolic (bottom)
This study is being conducted in two phases. Phase I 3:: 150
is complete and consisted of testing siX short-duration 5, W
crew members (<16 days Of spaceﬂight). All of these E 100 §
subj ects participated in preﬂight and postﬂight tilt E W
testing (10 minutes, 80 degrees) on a control ﬂight, ‘93 50 g
as well as 011 the test ﬂights where midodrine was 5
administered after landing, 1 hour before tilt testing. 0
Hemodynamie variables were compared between supine 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
the two ﬂights. Midodrine improved stroke volume, time standlng minutes
cardiac output, systolic pressure, and heart rate without Response to tilt before and after spaceﬂight
increasing vascular resistance. None of these subj ects
experienced 0rth0static hypotensron 0n landing day. The signiﬁcance of this report is that rnidodrine appeared
Phase II is similar to Phase 1, except that midodrine is to protect a previously susceptible astronaut from post-
ingested in ﬂight (near TIG) and the tilt test is performed spaceﬂight decreases in upright systolic pressure and
immediately after landing on the Crew Transport Vehicle presyncope. It had 110 untoward effects on crew members
(CTV). The CTV is used to transport the crew from who were not susceptible to post-spaeeﬂight 0rth0static
the orbiter and the crew health quarters, thus allowing hypotension. The beneﬁcial effects appeared to be primarily
immediate access to the crew. One crew member due to maintained venous return. The fact that preﬂight
completed Phase II testing and had no evidence of responses to upright posture were Virtually identical in the
0rth0statie hypotension 0r presyncope. The figure shows presyncopal crew member from the ﬁrst to second ﬂight
that this crew member’s heart rate (top panel) and blood indicates that physiological changes, including those due
pressure (systolic and diastolic) immediately following to aging, did not have a marked effect on our trial. These
landing was very similar to preﬂight during a 10-minute results suggest that a single, 10-mg oral dose of rnidodrine
80-degree ti1t test. SiX additional short-duration and may have the potential to protect presyneopal astronauts
two long-duration crew members have volunteered to from post-spaeeﬂight 0rth0static hypotension, without
participate in this study. inducing supine hypertension.
32 SPACE LIFE SCIENCES

"
