"","x"
"1","CHANGES IN OPTICAL AND THERMAL PROPERTIES
OF THE MISSE 2 PEACE POLYMERS AND SPACECRAFT SILICONES
Deborah L. Waters (1), Kim K. de Groh (2), Bruce A. Banks (3), Kevin C. Cameron (4)
(1) Arctic Slope Regional Corporation at NASA Glenn, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS. 309-2, Cleveland, OH 44135, USA.
Phone: 1 (216) 433-53 71, E-mail: debomh.l.waters@nasa.gov
(”NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS. 309-2, Cleveland, OH 44135, U.S.A.
Phone: 1 (216) 433-2297, E-mail: kim.k.degr0h@nasa.g0v
(34A119hap0rt, Inc. at NASA Glenn, 21000 Brookpark Rd, MS. 309-2, Cleveland, OH 44135, U.S.A.
Phone: 1 (216) 433-23 08, E-mail: bruce.a.banks@nasa.gov
(4)0100 Aerospace Institute, 22800 Cedar Point Rd, Cleveland, OH 44142, U.S.A.
ABSTRACT characteristics changed greatly upon directed LEO
atomic oxygen exposure. Typically, there is a decrease
This paper documents optical and thermal properties of in specular reﬂectance With an increase ih diffuse
polymers and silicones from the Materials International reﬂectance. These optical property changes are
Space Station Experiment 2 (MISSE 2) Polymer relevant to glare issues, Fresnel lens photovoltaic
Erosion and Contamination Experiment (PEACE) concentrator power loss issues and issues with spatial
Polymers experiment and from the MISSE 4 Spacecraft variations in the thermal lead on a spacecraft. The
Silicones experiment. PEACE included forty-one wavelength dependant data also allows computation of
polymer samples that were exposed to the low Earth the change ih solar absorptance (Ots) and thermal
orbit (LEO) environment on the exterior of the emittance, which is critical for predicting thermal
International Space Station (188) for almost four years. control characteristics Of a spacecraft. A summary Of
The Spacecraft Silicones experiment is comprised of the MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers and Spacecraft
eight DC 93-500® silicone samples manufactured by Silicones experiments, the speciﬁc materials ﬂOWh,
Dow Corning, four of which were ﬂown as part of optical and thermal property measurement procedures,
MISSE 2’ and four Of which were ﬂown as part Of and the optical and thermal property data are presented.
MISSE 4. MISSE 4 was exposed to the space
environment on the exterior of 18$ for 1 year. Both the 1- INTRODUCTION
PEACE Polymers and the Spacecraft Silicone
experiments were exposed to atomic oxygen (A0) Functional materials used on the exterior of spacecraft
along with solar and charged particle radiation while in are subject to many environmental threats that can
LEO. The majority Of the PEACE samples are cause degradation in material properties which can
comprised Of numerous thin ﬁhh layers stacked potentially threaten spacecraft mission success. In
together. Because many of the PEACE polymers are LEO these threats include A0» PhOtOh radiation,
commonly used for spacecraft applications, their charged particle radiation, temperature effects and
optical and thermal properties are very important. DC thermal cycling, impacts from micrometeoroids and
93-500® silicone is a popular spacecraft optical debris, and contamination. Atomic oxygen is the
adhesive, often used for photovoltaic applications, predominant gas species ih LEO and is present ih other
hence changes in optical properties, particularly planetary orbital environments. At spacecraft
transmittance, due to LEO exposure is very important. velocities, LEO A0 is energetic enough (~45 eV) t0
Changes in optical and thermal properties due to LEO cause bond breakage and subsequent oxidation. The
environmental exposure have been analyzed for all of oxidation products 0f most polymers are gas species,
the materials that could be measured. Due to the long therefore material erosion occurs. Atomic oxygen can
duration space exposure, several of the MISSE 2 produce serious structural, thermal or optical
samples were too degraded for their properties to be degradation 0f spacecraft components. [1]
measured. Total and diffuse reﬂectance, and total and
diffuse transmittance, were measured as a function Of The Materials International Space Station Experiment
wavelength and compared with non-eXposed control (MISSE) missions consist Of a series 0f ﬂight
samples. Specular reﬂectance and specular experiment trays exposed for long durations to the
transmittance were then computed. Thermal emittance LEO environment on the exterior of the International
data was also generated for numerous samples. For Space Station (155} Various materials, components
most samples, specular and diffuse reﬂectance and devices have been placed in the space enVironnient

"
"2","to determine durability in space. These experiments “' e h"" 7""“ ' . _ °__ ‘_ 3, E 4
have yielded very important materials knowledge for e \, V7 :rf‘. . . mba .""
current and future spacecraft performance. Numerous .tk \ ""(’31 m...3 Q . J /
MISSE experiment materials are analyzed in this paper "" .- A "" I d
to access the optical and thermal properties after long T ® ‘¥* (l) O Q , i v \J‘ J J”:
term LEO exposure. Unforeseen changes in either the \1 A» x. .m. v S v :5, 7::
optical properties or the thermal properties could have Fig. 2. Photogaph 0f MISSE 2 PEAE P olymer ‘
devastating effects to the spacecraft. exp erim e nt tray after exp 0 sur e
2. POLYMER EROSION AND
CONTAMINATION EXPERIMENT (PEACE) Although MISSE 2 was supposed to be a 15—year
. mission, planning for a three—year mission exposure
Forty—one different polymer samples, collectively was crucial in the success of this experiment, as it was
called the Polymer Erosion and Contamination exposed to LEO A0 for almost four years. The A0
Experiment (PEACE) Polymers, have been exposed to ﬂuence for the experiment was determined to be 8.43 X
the LEO space environment on the exterior of the ISS 1021 atoms/cm2 based on mass loss of the two
for nearly four years as part of Materials International polyimide Kapton H witness samples. Estimated
Space Station Experiment 2 (MISSE 2)- The purpose environmental conditions of solar exposure, tray
Of the MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers experiment was to temperatures, and ionizing radiation doses 011 MISSE 2
determine the AO erosion yield of a wide variety of are described in detail by Pippin. [3] The PEACE
polymeric materials exposed for an extended period of Polymers tray (E5) received approximately 6,300
time to the LEO space environment. The polymers Equivalent Sun Hours (ESH) of solar radiation. The
range from those commonly used for spacecraft base plate thermal cycling temperature range for
applications, such as Teﬂon® FEP, to more recently MISSE 2 was nominally between +40 °C and -30 0C
developed polymers. Additional polymers were with occasional short—term excursions to more extreme
included to explore erosion yield dependence upon temperatures. [3] The 3.95—year exposure duration in
chemical composition to enable the development of an LEO resulted in approximately 22,800 thermal cycles.
erosion yield predictive model. The majority 0f [3] The thermo—luminescent dosimeters (TLD) data
samples were comprised 0f thin ﬁlm polymers, With indicated that MISSE 2 received approximately 26
numerous layers stacked together to last a minimum of krads (Si) through 0005 cm aluminum. [3] Black light
three years in LEO- Figure 1 ShOWS pre—ﬂight, and inspection of the trays showed minimal to no
Figure 2 ShOWS post—ﬂight photographs 0f the MISSE 2 contamination 0n the MISSE surfaces. [3] Results of X-
PEACE Polymers experiment in sample tray 135- The ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) contamination
MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers experiment is unique analysis of two MISSE 2 sapphire witness samples in
because it contains the widest variety 0f well— sample tray E6 (located next to tray E5) indicated an
documented polymers exposed to identical long extremely thin silica contaminant layer (1.3 and 1.4 nm
duration LEO AO conditions. [2] Table 1 lists the on each slide, respectively). [4] A small amount Of
various polymers included in the PEACE polymers ﬂuorine was also detected. [4] The MISSE 2
experiment. Several samples were vacuum heat—treated environment was found to be an unusually clean
to reduce outgassing contamination prior to inclusion environment with very low spacecraft induced
on the MISSE 2 experiment and are listed in detail by molecular contamination. This is due to low
de Groh. [2] outgassing of other MISSE 2 Tray 1 materials and also
3 . 3 _ _ due to the position of MISSE 2 0n ISS. Therefore, the
07 .° ' ' ’ ""8 ﬂight data are not affected by contamination. This
0 . . . . ® 9 . GB @0 further increases the importance of this long duration
[‘9'@ 6 . ..@ . . @0% ﬂight data.
0. egﬂﬂ e o a 39%
Fig. 1. Photograph of MISSE 2 PEACE Polymer
experiment tray before exposure

"
"3","Table 1. MISSE2 PEACE 01 mers 3. SPACECRAFT SILICONES EXPERIMENT

(MISSE 2 and 4)
The objectlve 0f the Spacecraft Slhcones EXperlment
was to determlne changes 1n optlcal propertles and
nanomechanical surface hardness of silicones exposed
to various LEO A0 and UV radiation ﬂuence levels.
Silicones are widely used on spacecraft, such as the use
PVF Wh of DC 93-500® to bond cover glasses to solar cells for
the ISS photovoltaic array blankets or as protective
coatrngs 0n the back of solar arrays. Slhcones have
, , preV10us1y been thought of as belng AO durable
because they typically do not lose weight in an A0
environment and the surface converts to a glassy SiOX
layer. Unfortunately, the oxidized glassy layer
eventually shrinks as it densiﬁes and cracks, exposing
the underlying silicone or the substrate material to A0.
. The MISSE 2 and MISSE 4 Spacecraft Silicones
experiments each included four DC 93-500® silicone
samples. Three of the four samples were covered with
—“ different thickness layers of Kapton H (0.3 mil (8 pm),
0.5 mil (13 pm) and 0.8 mil (20 pm». in order for each
of the samples 1n the same eXperlment t0 recelve
different AO ﬂuences, as the AO erodes through the
over-laying Kapton before attacking the underlying
silicone. Because the 10 mil (254 pm) thick silicone
samples are rubbery and can stick to smooth surfaces,
they were placed on 1/16” (0.16 cm) thick fused silica
slides to allow post-ﬂight optical properties to be made
, without the samples bending and hence inducing
cracking in the glassy oxidized layer. Silicones can
darken with A0 and UV radiation eXposure increasing
the solar absorptance 0f the material, and hence
knowledge of the degree of darhening on-orhit is
des1red. The MISSE .2 Spacecraft Slhcones eXperlment
. . samples were ﬂown 1n PEC 2 sample tray E5 (samples
2435-1 to 2-E5-4), along with the MISSE 2 PEACE
Polymers experiment, and were exposed to ram
eXposure for 4 years. The MISSE 4 Spacecraft
Silicones Experiment samples were echised to ram
eX osure 0r 1 ear in MISSE 4 sam e tra E22
(simples 2-E22-2yt0 2-E22-5). The MISSE 2 simples
all crazed as the AO eXposure caused surface
shrinking. Figure 3 shows the “mud-tile” surface that
developed due to conversion of the silicone surface to a
silicate glassy layer. The A0 gaence for the MISSE 2
samples rangZIed from 843 X 10 . atorns/cm (no cover)
to 7.08 X 10 atoms/cm (0.8 11111 thlck Kapton cover).
[1] The A0 ﬂuence for the MISSE 4 samples ranged
from 2.1 X 1021 i 0.3 X 1021 atoms/cm2 (no cover) to
1.4 X 1021 i 0.3 X 1021 atoms/cm2 (0.8 mil thick Kapton

W [51

"
"4",": y. ﬁ ~ J ‘11.”;3;3': '\' -
:27] _ .‘WS"": ’ g ' ,‘l -:_ ~ -, ’._‘ \ .
-4 “- .- "". -.---

Fig. 3. Photo of MISSE 2 DC 93—500 Silicone sample
(2—E5—1) showing “rnud—tile” crazing Fig. 4. Photograph of sample holder for optical and

thermal measurements
4. PROCEDURE

4.1 Spectrophotometer Used For Optical
As noted above, many of the MISSE PEACE polyrner Characterization
samples were comprised of enough polymer thin ﬁlms
stacked together to survive a 3—year LEO exposure. A Perkin Elmer Larnbda—19 spectrophotometer was
Because the mission was ultimately four years in used to measure total reﬂectance (TR), diffuse
duration, many of the polymers lost numerous layers, reﬂectance (DR), total transrnittance (TT) and diffuse
one sample was completely eroded away and several of transrnittance (DT) from 250 nm to 2500 nm. The
the polymers were eroded through all layers in at least instrument is equipped with a 15 cm Spectralon
a portion of the exposed area. It was determined that integrating sphere. Specular reﬂectance (SR) and
the best way to measure the optical and thermal specular transrnittance (ST) are calculated from the
properties of the ﬂight samples was to determine which difference between total and diffuse values.
layers should be measured, and then compare the same AbsorptiVity data (1—reﬂectiVity—transmissiVity) can be
number of layers from control samples (prepared as integrated with respect to the air mass zero solar
back—up ﬂight sarnples). If a sample was partially spectrum to obtain solar absorptance (A). A Labsphere
eroded, that layer, along with the one beneath it was certiﬁed Spectralon standard was used for calibration.
analyzed and the control sample was made up with the Bearn size was checked on each of the samples to
same number of layers. If there was a question of AO verify that correct optical alignment was good.
erosion occurring on multiple layers, all partially
eroded layers were used along with one solid layer 4.2 Reﬂectometer Used For Thermal
beneath it. If the top layers could be damaged by Characterization
pulling the layers apart, the samples were left as a
whole and an equal number of control sample layers The Surface Optics Corporation Model SOC 400T can
were used for analysis. Several sarnples consisted of accurately measure the directional reﬂectance of
only one ﬂight layer such as pyrolytic graphite, and the surfaces over a large spectral range, 2 to 25 microns, to
silicone samples of MISSE 2 and 4. The DC 93—500® obtain the directional therrnal ernittance over a large
samples were kept on the fused silica base as to not temperature range. The unit provides a sample
induce any further cracking related to handling. The aperture of 1.27 cm (0.5 in.). Automatic integration of
properties of the silicone samples compared with the reﬂectivity data in the infrared with respect to
average of two control DC 93—500® samples on fused blackbody curves is used to calculate total ernittance
silica. for a user selectable temperature range. Data were

obtained at 200K, 300K, 400K, 500K and 573K. The
In order to handle the samples without damaging their samples were placed in the sample holder shown in
fragile erosion rnorphology, the samples were loaded Figure 5 and were backed by a Gier Dunkle gold
into a holder that mimicked the ﬂight hardware standard. The samples analyzed had to be placed
mounting plate (see Figure 4). This allowed the upside—down on the instrument, thus they needed to be
sample to be placed in the optical and thermal rnechanically stable enough to remain stationary for the
equipment without touching any of the delicate 3.5—rninute scan. Several sarnples could not be
surfaces. Only the holder would touch the equipment. analyzed due to the potential of the fragile layers
The front of the sample holder recessed the sample by falling into the instrument.
0.013 cm. The back of the holder allowed a caVity of
up to 0.305 cm dependent on the individual sample
thickness.

"
"5","Before thermally measuring all of the samples, Kapton Several trends were noted in the optical and thermal
(254 um) was ﬁrst measured by being placed directly data. For example, total reﬂectance generally
on the instrument backed with a gold standard and was increased at least slightly with exposure, exceptions
also measured in the sample holder with the gold noted were mainly the ﬂuorinated polymers and
standard backing. Table 2 shows the results of those pyrolytic graphite. Diffuse reﬂectance showed great
measurements. There is a slight increase in emittance increases with most materials (due to surface
due to use of the sample holder, although necessary to texturing), the exceptions being PBO, PBT, Nomex,
use due to the surface texture on the ﬂight samples. pyrolytic graphite and PTFE. Specular reﬂectance
This difference will be especially more noticeable with decreased in every sample measured (also due to
the thin ﬁlm, transparent samples and to a lesser degree surface texturing) with the exception of PMR-lS.
with the thicker or opaque samples. Thus, the thermal PMR-lS had an eroded hole on the sample and this
emittance values will be more of a comparison tool may have affected its value. Total transmittance
instead of absolute emittance values. decreased in most samples measured with the
exception of PEG, Nomex, and PTFE. Diffuse
Table 2. Thermal Emittance Values Comparing transmittance showed great increases with most
Measurement With and Without a Holder - Kapton materials but had many exceptions (White Tedlar,
Delrin, PEo, EP, PBT, PU, PC, PEEK). Specular
transmittance decreased in every sample with the
Direct exception of NomeX and PTFE. Solar absorptance
-----m increased in most cases with the exception of Kevlar,
Holder PMR-lS, PTFE and two of the MISSE 4 silicone
samples.
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4 lists the calculated thermal emittance data over
As noted above, one of the materials was completely the wavelength range 0f 2 to 25 microns at various
eroded and others were eroded enough that optical and temperatures as well as the number oflayers measured.
thermal measurements were not taken. Materials too Many 0f the emittance values remained very similar
damaged to measure optical and thermal properties before and after space exposure. Several materials
included PE (2435-9), PMMA (2-E5-l6), P A 66 (2-135- experienced a decrease in the emittance including a
28), PI CPl (2435-29), PBI (2435-35), and PET (2-135- large decrease with space exposure for PU and smaller
38). Due to the top sample position of the SOC 400T decreases for FEP and PTFE, possibly due differences
(hence, the samples are mounted upside down over the ih thickness between the ﬂight sample and control.
sensitive equipment), PS (2435-15), p130 (2-E5-l8) Quite a few materials showed an increase in emittance
and PPP A (2435-24) could not have their thermal values most likely due to the development of cone
properties measured f0r fear of losing the fragile structures on the surface of the materials. PG showed
samples in the instrument. the largest increase in emittance with the development
of a black velvet appearance after space exposure.
Post retrieval and control optical measurements, Other samples that experienced increased emittance
including total and diffuse reﬂectance and total and values included POM» PAN» PEO» EP» PP» PSU: PEI»
diffuse transmittance (TR, DR, TT, and DT UpileX-S, Kapton H, and PEEK. It should be noted
respectively), were taken of the remaining samples and that the samples were all measured ih the sample
are listed below in Table 3. The calculated values of holder, which was not ﬂush With the SOC 400T face ih
the specular reﬂectance, specular transmittance, and ah effort to not damage the surface morphology (0-013
solar absorptance (SR, ST, and A respectively), are cm away). The gold standard used as a backing
also listed in Table 3. The number of layers measured material for the measurements was also not ﬂush with
is also shown for each sample. the sample and had the thickness of the sample holder
between the sample and the gold standard. Therefore,
the values obtained ought to be used as a comparison
and not as absolute values for these materials.

"
"6","Table 3. Post Retrieval and Control Optical Properties Integrated from 250 11m to 2500 11m
Film #
—--lllllln

(pm) Measured

Fliht

Fliht

Fliht

Fliht

(Averae 0f 2 Controls)

"
"7","Film #
_--I“III

(um) Measured

Flight

Flight

Flight

Flight

(Average of 2 Controls)

"
"8","Table 4. Post Retrieval and Control Thermal Properties — Emittance
Measured
_—mmm
———————m
_m
——————m
_——————m
_—-“__m
——————m
_—————lnm
——————lnm
——mmmmm
——mmmmm
—_W
—————lnm
——————m
——————m
——————m
—mmm
—m

"
"9","_——————m
——————m
_—-“__
_——————m
—m
_m—
—m
—m—
——————m
———————m
Measured
_—-“__m
—mmm
—mmm
6. SUMMARY are commonly used for spacecraft applications,
knowledge of potential changes in their optical and
Optical and thermal properties were measured for the thermal properties with long term space exposure is
MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers experiment samples, and very important. A summary of the MISSE 2 PEACE
the MISSE 2 & 4 Spacecraft Silicone experiment Polymers and Spacecraft Silicones experiments, the
samples, after long-term space exposure on the ISS. speciﬁc materials ﬂown, optical and thermal property
The majority of the PEACE Polymer samples were measurement procedures, and the optical and thermal
comprised of numerous thin ﬁlm layers stacked property data is provided.
together. Because the MISSE 2 mission was much
longer (3.95 years) than planned (1.5 years), one 7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
sample was completely eroded away (FBI) and
numerous other samples were severely degraded. The authors would like to thank Brian Li of ASRC
Therefore, optical and thermal measurements could not Aerospace for his assistance in organizing thermal
be obtained on all samples. The optical properties of emittance data, Ed Sechkar of ASRC Aerospace for
43 samples, and thermal properties of 40 samples, were designing the sample mounting hardware, Frank Lam
obtained and compared to control samples. Several of Jacobs Sverdrup for preparing the sample mounting
trends were observed in the data. For most samples, hardware and Sharon Miller for her technical
specular and diffuse reﬂectance characteristics changed knowledge and assistance. We also greatly appreciate
greatly upon directed LEO atomic oxygen exposure. the support of the 188 Project Ofﬁce including Fred
Typically, there is a decrease in specular reﬂectance Kohl and the Orion Project Ofﬁce including Steve
with an increase in diffuse reﬂectance. Because many Johnson and Tom Kerslake from NASA Glenn
of the PEACE polymers, and the DC 93-500® silicone, Research Center.

"
"10","8. REFERENCES

[1] de Groh, K.K., Banks, B.A., Dever, J .A., Jaworske,
D.A., Miller, S.K., Sechkar, E.A., Panko, S.R., (2008)
NASA Glenn Research Center’s Materials
International Space Station Experiments (MISSE 1—7),
International Symposium on SM/MPAC and SEED
Experiments sponsored by the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency, Epochal Tsukuba, Japan, March
10—1 1, 2008

[2] de Groh, K.K., Banks, B.A., McCarthy, C.E.,
Rucker, R.N., Roberts, L.M., Berger, L.A., (2006)
MISSE 2 PEACE Polymers Atomic Oxygen Erosion
Experiment on the International Space Station, High
Performance Polymers, 2008; 20; 388.

[3] Pippin, G. (2006) Summary Status of MISSE-l and
MISSE-2 Experiments and Details of Estimated
Environmental Exposures for MISSE-l and MISSE-2,
AFRL-ML-WP-TR-2006-4237, TECHNICAL
OPERATIONS SUPPORT (TOPS) 11 (Delivery Order
0011), Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base, OH.

[4] Dever, J .A., Miller S.K., Sechkar, E.A., and
Wittberg, TN. (2006) Preliminary Analysis of Polymer
Film Thermal Control and Gossamer Materials
Experiments on MISSE 1 and MISSE 2, In:
Proceedings of the 2006 National Space & Missile
Materials Symposium in Conjunction With the 2006
MISSE Post-Retrieval Conference, June 26—30, 2006,
Orlando, FL.

[5] Miller, S.K., Banks, B.A., Tollis, G., (2008) MISSE
Results Used for RF Plasma Ground Testing to Space
Exposure Correlation for Coated Kapton, ICPMSE-9,
May 20-23, 2008 Toronto, Canada.

"
