"","x"
"1","NASA/TM—2012-217686

lvlbv‘ .‘réi‘,

An Investigation of Stress Dependent Atomic
Oxygen Erosion of Black Kapton
Observed 0n MISSE 6

Sharon KR. Miller

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Bruce A. Banks

Alphaport, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio

Edward Sechkar

ASRCAerOSpace Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio

December 2012

"
"2","NASA STI Program . . . in Proﬁle
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the - CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The papers from scientiﬁc and technical
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI) conferences, syrnposia, seminars, or other
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
this important role.
- SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices technical, or historical information from
of the Agency Chief Information Ofﬁcer. It collects, NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates concerned With subjects haVing substantial
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access public interest.
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports - TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections language translations of foreign scientiﬁc and
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world. technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which Specialized serVices also include creating custom
includes the following report types: thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of

completed research or a maj or signiﬁcant phase For more information about the NASA STI

of research that present the results of NASA program, see the following:

programs and include extensive data or theoretical

analysis. Includes compilations of signiﬁcant 0 Access the NASA STI program home page at

scientiﬁc and technical data and information http://www.sti.nasa.g0v

deemed to be of continuing reference value.

NASA counterpart of peer—reViewed formal - E-mail your question to help@sti.nasa.g0v

professional papers but has less stringent

limitations on manuscript length and extent of - Fax your question to the NASA STI

graphic presentations. Information Desk at 443—757—5 803
- TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc - Phone the NASA STI Information Desk at

and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or 443—75 7—5 802

of specialized interest, e.g., quick release

reports, working papers, and bibliographies that - Write to:

contain minimal annotation. Does not contain STI Information Desk

extensive analysis. NASA Center for AeroSpace Information

71 15 Standard Drive

- CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and Hanover, MD 21076—1320

technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored

contractors and grantees.

"
"3","NASA/TM—2012-217686

An Inve st1 gatlon of Stress Dependent Atomlc
Oxygen Ero $1011 of Black Kapton
Observed 011 M18 SE 6

Sharon KR. Miller

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Bruce A. Banks

Alphaport, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio

Edward Sechkar

ASRC Aerospace Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio

Prepared for the

2010 National Space and Missile Materials Symposium (NSMMS)
sponsored by General Dynamics Information Technology
Scottsdale, Arizona, June 28—July 1, 2010

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

Glenn Research Center

Cleveland, Ohio 44135

December 2012

"
"4","Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the original PFTE experiment principal investigator J oyce Dever for conceiving and assembling
this MISSE 6 ﬂight experiment. We also gratefully acknowledge the skilled craftsmanship OfFrank Lam (TFOME) at NASA GRC
for preparing some of the sample holders used for the MISSE 6 ﬂight experiment, and the environment dose measurements and
predictions made by Gary Pippin (Boeing C0rp., retired), Miria Finckenor (NASA MSFC) and Kim de Groh (NASA GRC). We
would also like to thank Dan Polis, Charles Powers, and Wanda Peters OfNASA GSFC for their support in developing speciﬁcations
for the ﬁxture for the stressed ﬁlm sample holders.
Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation
only. Their usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial endorsement, K e 6
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and p
Space Administration.
Level ofReview: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5 301 Shawnee Road
Hanover, MD 21076—1320 Alexandria, VA 22312
Available electronically at http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0V

"
"5","An Investigation of Stress Dependent Atomic Oxygen Erosion
of Black Kapton Observed on MISSE 6
Sharon K.R. Miller
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Bruce A. Banks
Alphaport, Inc.
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Edward Sechkar
ASRC Aerospace Corporation
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Abstract
Black Kapton XC polyimide was ﬂown as part of the Polymer F ilm Tensile Experiment (PFTE) on
Materials International Space Station Experiment 6 (MISSE 6). The purpose of the experiment was to
eXpose a variety of polymer ﬁlms, typical of those used for thermal control blankets or supporting
membranes on Earth orbiting spacecraft, to the low Earth orbital (LEO) environment under both relaxed
and tension conditions. Black Kapton XC under tensile stress experienced a higher erosion rate during
exposure in LEO than the same material that was ﬂown in a relaxed condition. Testing conducted to
determine the magnitude of the stress and erosion dependence using a ground-based thermal energy
atomic oxygen plasma showed a slight dependence of erosion yield on stress for Kapton HN and Black
Kapton XC, but not to the extent observed on MISSE 6. More testing is needed to isolate the factors
present in LEO that cause stress dependent erosion.
Introduction
Thin ﬁlm polymers are used in many spacecraft applications for thermal control (multi-layer
insulation and sunshields), as lightweight structural members (solar array blankets, inﬂatable/deployable
structures) and have been proposed for propulsion (solar sails). Polymers in these applications are
exposed to the space environment and are vulnerable to degradation by solar ultraviolet radiation, solar
ﬂare X-rays, solar wind electrons and protons trapped in Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, temperature and orbital
thermal cycling, and low Earth orbit (LEO) atomic oxygen (Ref. 1). In applications where the polymer
ﬁlm is under tension while exposed to these environmental factors, it is important to understand the effect
of stress in combination with the environment on the durability of thin polymer ﬁlms. Polymer ﬁlms were
ﬂown previously in the Polymer F ilm Thermal Control Experiment and the Gossamer Materials
Experiment as part of Materials International Space Station Experiment (MISSE) 1 as well as on MISSE
3, MISSE 4, and MISSE 5 (Refs. 2 and 3). The MISSE 6 exposure is different from prior such
experiments in that a number of the samples were designed to be exposed while under tension to better
simulate their use in space and determine if the stress level affects the durability. The dog-bone shaped
tensile samples of polymers were ﬂown on both the ram and wake facing sides of the MISSE 6 Passive
Experiment Containers (PECs). A description of all of the samples ﬂown as part of PFTE is contained in
Reference 4. This paper focuses on the results observed for Black Kapton XC ﬂown on MISSE 6 and the
results of ground testing conducted in an attempt to gain a better understanding of the erosion observed
in LEO.
NASA/TM—2012-217686 1

"
"6","Flight and Ground Based Experiment Description and Procedure
MISSE 6 Environment and Ground Based Atomic Oxygen Exposure

MISSE 6 was composed of two Passive Experiment Containers (PECS), 6A and 6B. Both PECS had
one side of the suitcase sty1e containers facing ram and the other side facing wake. They were both
installed on the European Columbus module of the International Space Station (188) on March 22, 2008,
during the ﬂight of STS-123. They were retrieved on September 1, 2009, by the crew of STS-128 after
slightly over 17 months in LEO. Environment exposure condition estimates that have been determined to
date are the atomic oxygen exposure level on each side and the UV radiation 1eve1 (Refs. 5 to 7). There
were also two Kapton HN/VDA tensi1e dogbones that were ﬂown as part of this experiment on the wake
side of MISSE 6A from which scanning electron microscope images of protected locations on the surface
were used to determine the erosion depth and u1timate1ythe atomic oxygen ﬂuence (Ref. 4). All of the
data seemed in good agreement with an estimate of the atomic oxygen arrival ﬂuence for the ram side of
6A and 6B of approximately 2><1021 atoms/cmZ, and for the wake side approximately 1.2 to 1.4><1020
atoms/cmZ. This indicates that the wake side of MISSE 6, which was to have received very low atomic
oxygen exposure was oriented in the ram direction long enough to have received an atomic oxygen dose
about 6.5 percent that of the ram oriented side. Estimates of the UV radiation exposure in equivalent sun
hours (ESH) were 2600 ESH for the ram sides of 6A and 6B and 1950 ESH for the wake sides of 6A and
6B (Ref. 7). Temperature, thermal cycling, and ionizing radiation estimates were not available at this
time.

Exposure to atomic oxygen for the ground based tests was conducted in an AXIC LF-S plasma
system pumped with a Varian SH110 Scroll Pump. Air was used as the feed gas and a radio frequency
power of about 36 W was applied to the internal electrodes to form the thermal energy (~0.04 eV) atomic
oxygen plasma that was used to eXpose samples placed inside the chamber. The effective atomic oxygen
ﬂuence for these tests was about a factor of 6 higher than for the ﬂight samples.

Experiment Design for Application of Tensile Stress

The ﬂight experiment was designed to allow some of the polymer dog-bone type samples to be
exposed under a tensile load typical of expected conditions for the J ames Webb Space Telescope
sunshield. The tensile load of approximately ~2.22 N (0.5 lb) was applied by mounting the sample in a
holder similar to that shown on the left side of the photo in F igure 1 and then compressing a spring with a
spring constant of ~3 85 N/m (2.2 1b/in.) by approximately ~0.0058 m (0.227 in.) to put the sample under
an approximately constant tensile load. The drawing in F igure 1 shows a double sample holder where the
sample on the left did not have an applied tensile stress and the one on the right did. For the samples
exposed under stress, the resulting stress was dependent on the polymer ﬁlm thickness per Equation (1)
with an average gage width of approximately 0.0032 m (0.126 in.). For the Black Kapton XC samples,
the applied stress was ~2.76><107 N/m2 (~4000 psi) as the ﬁlms were 2.54><10_5 m (0.001 in.) in thickness.

Stress = (F orce/Area) = (F orce)/(Gage width) * (Thickness) (1)

For the ground based testing, the same sample holders were used but slightly modiﬁed to allow other
spring compression lengths to achieve a wider variety of tensile stress on the samples. This was
accomplished by modifying the rod underneath to allow greater travel of the spring and through the use of
copper u-shaped shims to compress the spring and place the sample under a ﬁxed tensile load.
NASA/TM—2012-217686 2

"
"7","(11:? ' , , . 2 *é ‘a 2A,,0 . \
-~~~~~”-Mb . \
WT” m
g ‘ _. .
II] ElIIﬂﬂllﬂﬂﬁﬂﬂlﬂﬂlﬂﬂlﬂﬂﬂlliiﬁiﬁiﬁiﬁiiﬁﬁiﬁ_ﬁ—I @
i-Ill- L—-------—--------—-: I-' _,
1.25
ﬁmﬁmnnnnnnnuununnmlmm-
0.227
Figure 1.—Photo of stressed (left) and unstressed (right) sample
holders from above, and a side view drawing of a holder showing the
unstressed sample position on the left and the stressed on the right.
(Dimensions are in inches.) The stressed sample is fixed on the left
side and allowed to move to the right by having the mount hole on
the right slotted. Tension is supplied by compression of the spring.
Sample Description
All of the samples, both for ﬂight and for ground testing were punched from polymer sheets using a
die manufactured according to specimen “Type V” under the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) Standard D-638 (Ref. 8). The dog-bone shaped die had a gage length of 7.62 mm (0.3 in.) and an
average gage width of 3.21 i 0.02 mm (0.126 in.). The Black Kapton XC (100XC10E7), a carbon
pigmented polyimide, was manufactured by DuPont. It had a vapor deposited aluminum coating on the
back that was originally intended to provide electrical contact for an active sample break indication but
due to some wiring issues prior to ﬁght, the ﬂight samples were not wired for active monitoring. The
unﬂown extra control samples were used for the ground experiment testing. There were also Kapton HN
samples ﬂown on MISSE 6 but the ones on the ram side had a SiOX protective coating on the space
exposed side to prevent erosion by atomic oxygen, and the ones on the wake side were not under stress.
For ground tests, Kapton HN manufactured by DuPont of 5.08><10_5 m (0.002 in.) in thickness was used
to obtain atomic oxygen ﬂuX maps and for stress erosion comparison for the ground based experiments
due to the limited supply of Black Kapton XC samples. The Kapton HN samples were punched from the
same die, but a thin layer of magnetron sputter deposited gold was applied to the back of the sample to
prevent atomic oxygen erosion of the back side. Thin pieces of aluminum foil were cut to ﬁt and wrapped
over the grip and transition area on the front side of the Kapton HN and Black Kapton XC samples, so
that only the gauge length would be exposed to atomic oxygen for more accurate measurement of the
erosion at a ﬁxed stress level, before they were secured in the holder.
Analysis
The mass of the samples before and after exposure was measured using a Sartorius MES
microbalance. Samples were dehydrated at a vacuum of approximately 8.67 Pa (65 mTorr) for 48 hr prior
to weighing to minimize errors due to absorption of moisture from the air. The change in mass of the
Kapton HN was used to determine the atomic oxygen ﬂuence at the surface according to ASTM E-2089
(Ref. 9). Change in mass was also used to determine the erosion during ﬂight or in ground tests. Overall
NASA/TM—2012—217686 3

"
"8","and close up photos were taken of the samples post ﬂight, and before and after ground testing, using a
Sony Cybershot DSC T-9 camera. Initial observations were recorded and a few selected samples were
gold coated and mounted for scanning electron microscopy with a JEOL J SM-63 90 LV seaming electron
microscope (10 keV) with energy dispersive analysis by X-rays (EDAX).
Results and Discussion
Kapton XC Samples on MISSE 6
Two unstressed samples of black Kapton (XC) were exposed on the ram side of MISSE 6. Both
samples appeared to show evidence of texturing of the surface with a darker appearance near each end of
the dog-bone sample. One of these samples designated AO-S-l was inadvertently put under stress when
one end of the sample holder was moved, which changed the overall sample length by ~0.0017 m
(~0.068 in.). This sample was installed in a sample holder initially designed for putting the sample under
a tensile load so the holder on the top side of the sample had a slotted mount hole. It appears that the
sample was inadvertently bumped and the one end of the holder moved putting the sample under a high
tensile stress even though it was not initially intended to be stressed. There was a cable that was passed up
between this sample tray (G3) and the neighboring tray very close to AO-S-l which may have provided
the opportunity for inadvertent bumping of the one end of the sample holder during experiment
installation. The movement put a strain on the sample (for an undetermined length of time) of ~0.07. This
represents approximately 26 percent of the maximum strain for Kapton XC. The resulting stress on the
sample was 2.32><108 N/m2 (33,600 psi) which is greater than the yield strength of Kapton XC. The
sample had a silvered appearance on the end that was stretched and distorted which is evident from the
photograph in Figure 2.
' ;. 1-"" «l. f' ‘ ‘
"" g £
‘. 1. . fr!‘ 7‘"" t / I
J §‘ .2.
Figure 2.—Kapton XC flown on ram side of

MISSE 6 (AO-S-1) showing stretching of the

sample at the silver area at the top of the

sample in the photograph
NASA/TM—2012-217686 4

"
"9","The appearance of the sample raises two questions. The ﬁrst is why the stretched end appears silver
and the second is why the black Kapton appears to be darker in the region of higher stress? In order to try
to answer these questions, SEM and EDAX analysis was performed on the sample at selected locations
shown in Figure 3, SEM images in Figure 3 show a signiﬁcant change in surface morphology from the
center to the edge. The center portion has a smooth lumpy appearance typical of black Kapton which
progresses to an area which looks as if it had a thin ﬁlm gossamer coating on it with many cracks
perpendicular to the pull direction. There are ﬁne cone-like peaks in areas where there is cracking which
progresses to almost all peaks with thin wisps of ﬁlm on the surface nearer to the silver area. At the edge
where the sample separated, there are only a few short peaks remaining. EDAX scans indicate mostly
carbon and oxygen signals in the central region progressing to a high concentration of aluminum near the
stretched end. This sample was originally intended to be put under stress and wired so there was a vapor
deposited aluminum coating on the back side. It appears that as the stress on the sample is increased, the
erosion rate of the black Kapton increases which results in ﬁrst development of surface texture cones and
a thin ﬁlm of ash from oxidation of the black Kapton. This progresses to loss of ash and erosion of the
mostly carbon cones to the point at which the vapor deposited aluminum is predominantly what is left
looking like a blanket of snow at the base of the remaining carbon peaks. If erosion of the Kapton XC is
dependent on the level of stress, then there should be an observable difference between the stressed and
unstressed samples of Kapton XC that were ﬂown on the wake side of MISSE 6.

The stressed and unstressed samples of Kapton XC ﬂown on the wake side did appear very different
from each other. The two unstressed samples appeared slightly textured while the two stressed samples
were very dark matte black in appearance. A photo of the two sample pairs is shown in Figure l. The
stress level during exposure was ~2.76>< lO7 N/m2 (~4000 psi) and the strain was ~0.008 which represents
about 3 percent of the maximum strain. The stress on the sample was about 24 percent of the tensile
strength. This does not appear to be a signiﬁcant amount of strain on the material but is enough to cause a
difference in the appearance of the erosion of the material due to oxidation by atomic oxygen. Figure 4
shows side-by-side SEM images at 45° tilt of the stressed (UV-S-Z) sample of Kapton XC on the left and
the unstressed (UV-U-2) sample of Kapton XC on the right. There is more surface texturing occurring on
the stressed sample than the unstressed sample as can be seen in the top 2/3rds of the image. The bottom
1/3 was under the sample mount and protected from erosion by atomic oxygen. The unstressed sample is
only slightly different in appearance to the unexposed surface, while the surface of the stressed sample
has undergone very noticeable erosion.

3‘ ': f, f? . 1 ~ i t -
1&3"" "" ﬁ‘ﬂﬁl‘ﬁi mo m was ’ . — . .~ "" 2.: ""
M5». 51x1}! -.:?-;E:‘3ft?iiiii‘ifi1-: r .4‘ ‘ V 2: 5.2 - i ‘
“xj;*;'£\ . . v. - , '1 , - ,. ~ Wk
ii‘éi“. 4 555%: 5* "":.‘x..‘-“.‘~;-.é, w ' = , ‘., ' -' w. "" .‘
*“°"" ‘3 i , 3‘“ ,M’; ‘17:“
‘ ' I m- - - ‘
Figure 3.—SEM images of selected positions on sample AO-S-1 exposed on the ram side of MISSE 6.
NASA/TM—2012-217686 5

"
"10","Stressed UV-E-I mm.“ Unatressed UV-U-E
. -1+.:-_.=- *m— -=_ji-:§,_.'}_‘.E' ;+__.,;.~.'w':.r'-;.-+;r-;_~L_ H _ ' - _ . ; r ' -.
Faiwﬁﬁ‘ettiﬁﬁ ' . '. ' ' h . - '. ' ' '
'.Jn-:'|nr Mn...”

Figure 4.—Scanning electron microscope images of stressed (left) and
unstressed (right) Kapton XC at 450 tilt. Top approximately 2/3 was
exposed to the space environment on the wake side of MISSE 6 while
the bottom ~1/3 was protected by the clamp holding the sample in place.

To better quantify the erosion, both the stressed and unstressed ﬂight samples (UV-S-l and UV-U-l)
were dehydrated and weighed. The samples had not been weighed prior to ﬂight, so a pre-ﬂight mass
estimate was made by taking four measurements on each of siX control specimens and using the average
mass as the pre-ﬂight mass for both samples. The resulting erosion yield for each sample (cm3/at0m) was
7.01 ><10‘25 i 9.94><10‘25 for the unstressed sample and 2.93><10_24 i 1.84><10_24 for the stressed sample.
The error is large due to the very low change in mass and the error in the pre-ﬂight mass estimate. In spite
of this, the erosion yield for the stressed sample was still greater than the error. A rough estimate from
this data is that the erosion yield for Black Kapton XC at a tensile stress 0f~2.76><107 N/m2 (~4000 psi) is
about a factor of 4 higher than for the same material not under stress. In order to obtain a better
measurement and determine if there is a stress level dependence on erosion of Kapton and Black Kapton,
ground tests were conducted with the samples at different stress levels.

Ground Testing Using Thermal Energy Atomic Oxygen

Dehydrated and weighed unstressed Kapton HN tensile samples were mounted in each of eight
sample positions of the four modiﬁed ﬂight sample holders sitting on an aluminum plate. The plate was
placed in the vacuum chamber and the samples exposed to the RF atomic oxygen plasma. The mass
change of each sample was used to determine the atomic oxygen ﬂuX at each position and the data from
the ﬂuX map was used to correct the erosion data from the exposure tests with Kapton HN and Black
Kapton XC under stress to account for spatial variation in the atomic oxygen arrival.

Kapton HN samples were installed in the same sample holders and four of the samples were loaded to
varying stress levels with two unstressed samples included for ﬂuence witnesses. The atomic oxygen
arrival ratio for the two unstressed samples was within error of that observed for the ﬂuX map so the
ﬂuence at the locations of the stressed samples was estimated using the ﬂuX map and ﬂuence measured at
the control locations. Figure 5 contains a graph of the resulting erosion yield (cm3 removed per incoming
atom) as a function of tensile stress for Kapton HN. As can be seen from the graph, at stress levels above
2><107 Pa, the erosion yield exhibited a slight increase with increasing stress.

The erosion yield for two stress levels of Kapton HN normalized with respect to the unstressed
erosion yield for that material was compared with that obtained for two Black Kapton XC samples
exposed in the ground based atomic oxygen plasma chamber in the same positions and with the same
spring compression level as that of the Kapton HN. The resulting stressed to unstressed erosion ratios
shown in Figure 6 were within error of each other but much lower than the erosion ratio for the stressed to
unstressed Black Kapton XC exposed on MISSE 6. The error in the ﬂight data is not shown but is
expected to be large in comparison to that for the ground based atomic oxygen exposure data. However,
there was very little difference in the surface appearance of the ground test data compared with that
observed on MISSE 6.

NASA/TM—2012-217686 6

"
"11","E‘
.9
:5;
O
E 3.8e-24
.9
8
*5 3.69-24
8
5
9 3.4e-24
E |
9
(\0 329-24
(‘0
E
9
2 3.0e-24 +
.9
>—
5 2.8e-24
(D
9
UJ
C 2.6e-24
CD
CD
>~.
5 2.4e-24
E 0 19+? 29+? 39+? 49+? 59+?
9 2
< Tensile Stress (N/m )
Figure 5.—Atomic oxygen erosion ratio as a function of stress for Kapton HN
exposed to ground based thermal energy atomic oxygen.
C
.9
'6
0
fl 5
.5
'O
.9.
E 4 V
’5
o
C
.9
E 3
UJ
'O
G)
$
93 2
17»
C
3
0
g 1 +64 H—Q—I—I |—Q—|
3
(D
93
67)
H5 0
g 0 29+? 49+? 69+? 89+?
(6
DC Tensile Stress (N/m2)
. Kapton HN in RF Atomic Oxygen Plasma
0 Black Kapton XC in RF Atomic Oxygen Plasma
V MISSE 6 Exposed Black Kapton XC
Figure 6.—Ratio of stressed to unstressed erosion yields for Kapton
HN, and Black Kapton XC exposed to a ground based thermal energy
atomic oxygen plasma as a function of tensile stress compared to that
for Black Kapton XC exposed on MISSE 6.
NASA/TM—2012-217686 7

"
"12","Conclusions
Black Kapton XC exposed on MISSE 6 exhibited statistically a signiﬁcantly higher erosion rate when
placed under tensile stress as observed for the highly stressed sample on the ram side and two stress
loaded samples on the wake side. Although a slight stress dependence was also observed in the ground
based thermal energy atomic oxygen chamber for Kapton HN, and Black Kapton HN, the magnitude of
the difference between the stressed and unstressed samples both in appearance and in the erosion yield
was not the same as that observed in LEO. There are, however, differences between the ground based and

LEO exposure environments which could cause this difference. There is an energy difference for the

atomic oxygen (4.5 eV in LEO compared to 0.04 eV in the ground chamber) and different levels of UV

radiation, temperature, and charged particles. The ground system also lacks energetic protons, electrons,
and X-rays which are present in LEO. It is possible that two or more environment factors must be present
to greatly affect the erosion rate of a stressed polymer such as Kapton HN and Black Kapton XC. F urther
testing is needed to isolate the factors which result in increased erosion under stress.

References

1. Dever, J .A., Banks, B.A., de Groh, K.K., and Miller, S.K. Degradation of Spacecraft Materials in
Handbook ofEnvironmental Degradation ofSpacecraﬁ Materials, Kutz, M. Editor, William Andrew
Publishing, Norwich, New York, (2005).

2. Dever, J .A., Miller, S.K., Sechkar, E.A., and Wittberg, T.N. Space Environment Exposure of Polymer
F ilms 0n the Materials International Space Station Experiment, Results from MISSE 1 and MISSE 2,
Journal oing/z Performance Polymers, J .W. Connell, editor, volume 20, n0 4/5, August/October,
(2008)

3. Miller, SK. and Dever, J .A. Space Environment Exposure Results from the MISSE 5 Polymer F ilm
Thermal Control Experiment on the International Space Station, Proceedings of the 11th International
Symposium on Materials in the Space Environment ISMSE-I I, AiX-en-Provence, F rance, September,
(2009)

4. Miller, S.K.R, et a1., MISSE 6 Polymer F ilm Tensile Experiment. Proceedings of the 2010 National
Space & Missile Materials Symposium (NSMMS), Scottsdale, AZ, June 28-July 1, (2010).

5. Personal electronic mail communication with Miria F inckenor, NASA Marshall Space F light Center,
(3/30/2010).

6. de Groh, K.K., Banks, B.A., Guo, A., Ashmead, C.C., Mitchell, G.G. and Yi, G.T. , “MISSE 6
Polymers Atomic Oxygen Erosion Data,” Presented at the 2010 National Space & Missile Materials
Symposium (NSMMS), Scottsdale, AZ, June 28 — July 1, (2010).

7. ESH estimates provided by the Boeing 188 Thermal Analysis group, contact: Gary Pippin, retired,
Boeing, May (2010).

8. American Society for Testing and Materials (1995), Standard T est Method for T ensile Properties of
Plastics, ASTM D 63 8-95 , American Society for Testing and Materials, West Coshohocken.

9. American Society for Testing and Materials (2000), Standard Practices for Ground Laboratory
Atomic Oxygen Interaction Evaluation ofMaterialeor Space Applications, ASTM E 2089-00,
American Society for Testing and Materials, West Coshohocken.

NASA/TM—2012-217686 8

"
"13",""
"14","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB NO. 0704-0188
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB
t | b .

ICDCEEESEUETO ﬂOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From - TO)
01—12—2012 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER
An Investigation of Stress Dependent Atomic Oxygen Erosion of Black Kapton Observed 0n
MISSE 6 5b. GRANT NUMBER

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
6. AUTHOR(S) 5d. PROJECT NUMBER
Miller, Sharon, K., R.; Banks, Bruce, A.; Sechkar, Edward

5e. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

WBS 904211.04.02.30.17
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
National Aeronautics and Space Administration REPORT NUMBER
J ohn H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 1348369
Cleveland, Ohio 44135—3 191
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORING/MONITOR'S
National Aeronautics and Space Administration ACRONYWS)
Washington, DC 20546—0001 NASA

11. SPONSORING/MONITORING

REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2012—217686
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Unclassiﬁed-Unlimited
Subject Category: 27
Available electronically at http://www.sti.nasa.g0v
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 443-75 7-5 802
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
14. ABSTRACT
Black Kapton XC polyimide was ﬂown as part of the Polymer Film Tensile Experiment (PFTE) 0n Materials International Space Station
Experiment 6 (MISSE 6). The purpose of the experiment was to expose a variety of polymer ﬁlms, typical of those used for thermal control
blankets or supporting membranes on Earth orbiting spacecraft, to the low Earth orbital (LEO) environment under both relaxed and tension
conditions. Black Kapton XC under tensile stress experienced a higher erosion rate during exposure in LEO than the same material that was
ﬂown in a relaxed condition. Testing conducted to determine the magnitude of the stress and erosion dependence using a ground-based
thermal energy atomic oxygen plasma showed a slight dependence of erosion yield on stress for Kapton HN and Black Kapton XC, but not
to the extent observed on MISSE 6. More testing is needed to isolate the factors present in LEO that cause stress dependent erosion.
15. SUBJECT TERMS
Oxygen atoms; Space environment; MISSE; Erosion; Polymer; Tensile stress
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

ABSTRACT OF STI Help Desk (email:he1p@sti.nasa. gov)
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGES 19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code)
U U EAGE UU 16 443-757—5802
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18

"
"15",""
"16",""
