"","x"
"1","NASA/TM—2012-217645
lvlbv‘ 2i? i,
Embrittlement of M18 SE 5 Polymers
After 13 Months of Space Exposure
A0190 Guo, Grace T Yi, Claire C. Ashmead, and Gianna G. Mitchell
Hathaway Brown School, Shaker Heights, Ohio
Kim K. a’e Grok
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Bruce A. Banks
Alphaport, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio
September 2012

"
"2","NASA STI Program . . . in Proﬁle
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the - CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The papers from scientiﬁc and technical
NASA Scientiﬁc and Technical Information (STI) conferences, syrnposia, seminars, or other
program plays a key part in helping NASA maintain meetings sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
this important role.
- SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientiﬁc,
The NASA STI Program operates under the auspices technical, or historical information from
of the Agency Chief Information Ofﬁcer. It collects, NASA programs, projects, and missions, often
organizes, provides for archiving, and disseminates concerned With subjects haVing substantial
NASA’s STI. The NASA STI program provides access public interest.
to the NASA Aeronautics and Space Database and
its public interface, the NASA Technical Reports - TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
Server, thus providing one of the largest collections language translations of foreign scientiﬁc and
of aeronautical and space science STI in the world. technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Results are published in both non-NASA channels
and by NASA in the NASA STI Report Series, which Specialized serVices also include creating custom
includes the following report types: thesauri, building customized databases, organizing
and publishing research results.

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of

completed research or a maj or signiﬁcant phase For more information about the NASA STI

of research that present the results of NASA program, see the following:

programs and include extensive data or theoretical

analysis. Includes compilations of signiﬁcant 0 Access the NASA STI program home page at

scientiﬁc and technical data and information http://www.sti.nasa.g0v

deemed to be of continuing reference value.

NASA counterpart of peer—reViewed formal - E-mail your question to help@sti.nasa.g0v

professional papers but has less stringent

limitations on manuscript length and extent of - Fax your question to the NASA STI

graphic presentations. Information Desk at 443—757—5 803
- TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientiﬁc - Phone the NASA STI Information Desk at

and technical ﬁndings that are preliminary or 443—757—5 802

of specialized interest, e.g., quick release

reports, working papers, and bibliographies that - Write to:

contain minimal annotation. Does not contain STI Information Desk

extensive analysis. NASA Center for AeroSpace Information

71 15 Standard Drive

- CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientiﬁc and Hanover, MD 21076—1320

technical ﬁndings by NASA-sponsored

contractors and grantees.

"
"3","NASA/TM—2012-217645

Embrlttlement of M18 SE 5 Polymers
After 13 Months of Space Exposure

A0190 Guo, Grace T Yi, Claire C. Ashmead, and Gianna G. Mitchell

Hathaway Brown School, Shaker Heights, Ohio

Kim K. a’e Grok

Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio

Bruce A. Banks

Alphaport, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio

Prepared for the

10th International Space Conference on Protection of Materials and Structures From
the Space Environment (ICPMSE-IOJ)

cosponsored by ITL, MDA, CSA, JAXA, Kobe University Graduate School of Engineering, and the
Society for Promotion of Space Science

Bankoku-Shinryokan, Okinawa, J apan, June 12—17, 2011

National Aeronautics and

Space Administration

Glenn Research Center

Cleveland, Ohio 44135

September 2012

"
"4","Acknowledgments
We would like to express our sincere appreciation to Bill Kinard, formerly OfNASA Langley Research Center, and Gary H. Pippin,
formerly of Boeing, for providing the unique opportunity to be a part of the MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket Materials Experiment. We
also thank Patty Hunt of Hathaway Brown School for making it possible for the students to be a part of this project. This work
was support by the NASA 188 Research Program.
Trade names and trademarks are used in this report for identiﬁcation
only. Their usage does not constitute an ofﬁcial endorsement,
either expressed or implied, by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.
Level ofReview: This material has been technically reviewed by technical management.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information National Technical Information Service
7115 Standard Drive 5 301 Shawnee Road
Hanover, MD 21076—1320 Alexandria, VA 22312
Available electronically at http://WWW.sti.nasa.g0V

"
"5","Embrittlement of MISSE 5 Polymers
After 13 Months of Space Exposure
Aobo Guo, Grace T. Yi, Claire C. Ashmead, and Gianna G. Mitchell
Hathaway Brown School
Shaker Heights, Ohio 44122
Kim K. de Groh
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Bruce A. Banks
Alphaport, Inc.
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Abstract
Understanding space enVironment induced degradation of spacecraft materials is essential when
designing durable and stable spacecraft components. As a result of space radiation, debris impacts, atomic
oxygen interaction, and thermal cycling, the outer surfaces of space materials degrade when exposed to
low Earth orbit (LEO). The objective of this study was to measure the embrittlement of 37 thin ﬁlm
polymers after LEO space exposure. The polymers were ﬂown aboard the International Space Station and
exposed to the LEO space enVironment as part of the Materials International Space Station Experiment 5
(MISSE 5). The samples were ﬂown in a nadir-faoing position for 13 months and were exposed to
thermal cycling along with low doses of atomic oxygen, direct solar radiation and omni-direotional
charged particle radiation. The samples were analyzed for spaoe-induoed embrittlement using a bend-test
procedure in which the strain necessary to induce surface cracking was determined. Bend-testing was
conducted using successively smaller mandrels to apply a surface strain to samples placed on a semi-
suspended pliable platform. A pristine sample was also tested for each ﬂight sample. Eighteen of the
37 ﬂight samples experienced some degree of surface cracking during bend-testing, while none of the
pristine samples experienced any degree of cracking. The results indicate that 49 percent of the MISSE 5
thin ﬁlm polymers became embrittled in the space enVironment even though they were exposed to low
doses (~2.75 krad (Si) dose through 127 pm Kapton) of ionizing radiation.
Introduction
As a result of space radiation, debris impacts, atomic oxygen interaction, and thermal cycling, the
outer surfaces of space materials degrade when exposed to low Earth orbit (LEO) (Ref. 1). As ionizing
radiation is known to embrittle polymers and has severely embrittled the Teﬂon ﬂuorinated ethylene
propylene (FEP) outer layer of the multilayer insulation covering the Hubble Space Telescope (Ref. 2). A
study was conducted to measure the embrittlement of 37 thin ﬁlm polymers after LEO space exposure.
The polymers were ﬂown aboard the International Space Station and exposed to the LEO space
enVironment for 13 months as part of the Materials International Space Station Experiment 5 (MISSE 5).
NASA/TM—20l2-2l7645 l

"
"6","MISSE is a series of spaceﬂight experiments designed to test the performance and durability of
materials and devices exposed to the low Earth orbit (LEO) space environment. MISSE consists of 11
ﬂight experiment trays (10 Passive Experiment Carriers (PECs) and one smaller tray being ﬂown with
MISSE 8) that are mounted to the exterior of the International Space Station (188). Each two-sided tray
contains numerous individual ﬂight experiments and are positioned in either a rarn/wake orientation or a
zenith/nadir orientation (Ref. 3). The MISSE 5 polymer samples were from the Polymer Erosion and
Contamination Experiment (PEACE) and were ﬂown in a nadir-faoing position for 13 months, which
resulted in exposure to omni-directional charged particle radiation, thermal cycling, and low doses of
atomic oxygen and direct solar radiation (Ref. 3). The samples were analyzed for spaoe-induced
embrittlement using a bend-test procedure in which the strain necessary to induce surface cracking was
determined. Details on the MISSE 5 experiment, polymer ﬂight samples, test procedures, and bend-test
results are provided.

MISSE 5 Experiments and Exposure

MISSE 5 contained two active and one passive experiments: The Forward Technology Solar Cell
Experiment (FTSCE), an active experiment that tested the performance of 36 current and advanced
generation solar cells for use on future spacecraft; the active Second Prototype Communication Satellite
System (PCSat-2) that provided a communications system and tested the Amateur Satellite Service
off—the-shelf solution for telemetry command and control; and the passive MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket
Materials Experiment, which consisted of several individual experiments to measure the degradation of
more than 200 materials in the space environment (Ref. 3). The 37 PEACE samples were ﬂown as part of
the MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket Materials Experiment.

MISSE 5 was placed in a zenith/nadir position on the P6 Trunion Pin Handrail of the International
Space Station (188) during the STS-114 mission on August 3, 2005. Figure 1 shows a pre-ﬂight
photograph of MISSE 5 and an on-orbit photo taken during the STS-114 mission. MISSE 5 was exposed
to the LEO space environment for 13 months, and was retrieved on September 15, 2006 during the
STS-115 mission.

It is estimated that the polymers received an ionizing radiation (also called charged particle radiation)
dose of ~2.75 krads(Si) through 127 um Kapton, 165i25 direct Sun hours (~360 Earth reﬂected), an
atomic oxygen ﬂuence of ~1.8><0. 1020 atoms/cmz, and 6400 thermal cycles (Ref. 4). Temperature range
was estimated from the experiment deck temperature for the Forward Technology Solar Cell Experiment
on the solar facing side of MISSE 5 (Ref. 5).

' ' : : . .'""'*.""-_'~..‘t- 1’3

.1: I .h-.I-_:_]IF|""""“'—:— l...” r; _ l _
lfﬂ: . '5 E E ‘11:}: i 1‘ ' 1' T: 7 w ”math? . ....
._‘..'._'_:'___ _ +'- :: -;_- - , * l .....n

__ ..-. -' .. ~ __ ' MISSE 5

F; -..+. :. 'k- .
(a) (b)
Figure 1.—MISSE 5: (a) Pre-flight, and (b) On-orbit photo taken during STS-114 of the zenith facing experiments.
NASA/TM—2012-217645 2

"
"7","l I , I "" ‘» 53
p I -
. m I . ° ’ i I ‘ Ll ‘
__._ . 4 I
'7'.‘ ""h-“ Iiiih—‘i h
. -

Figure 2.—Pre-f|ight photograph of the MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket
Experiment (before the stitching and additional tape was applied).
The PEACE Polymer samples are outlined in white.

MISSE 5 PEACE Polymers Experiment

The MISSE 5 PEACE Polymers experiment consisted of 49 to 0.5 in. (1.27 cm) x 1.5 in. (3.81 cm)
rectangular polymer material samples with 53 polymer materials. The majority of samples were thin ﬁlm
ﬂexible polymers. A few rigid samples were also ﬂown sandwiched between two pieces of either
Kapton H or Kapton HN with Y966 acrylic adhesive. The primary experiment objective was to determine
the atomic oxygen erosion yield (Ey, cm3/at0m) of polymers after space exposure in a nadir orientation.
As the Thermal Blanket Materials Experiment needed to be thin and ﬂexible, samples were taped and
then sewn onto a Kapton blanket substrate therefore making determination of the By based on mass loss
impossible. Therefore, all samples were dusted with ﬁne salt-spray particles to provide isolated locations
of protection from atomic oxygen erosion so that recession depth measurements could be made post-ﬂight
for By determination (Ref. 3). Figure 2 is a pre-ﬂight photograph of the MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket
Experiment with the PEACE Polymer experiment samples highlighted.

Thirty-seven 0f the 49 PEACE polymer samples were in a conﬁguration that could be evaluated for
surface embrittlement through bend-testing. The other 12 samples were not in thin ﬁlm form and hence
were not tested. A list of the ﬂight samples that were tested along with the MISSE 5 ﬂight sample
number, the polymer name, the polymer abbreviation, trade names and the ﬁlm thickness, are provided in
Table l in the Results and Discussion section.

Experiment Procedures
Sectioning Bend-Test Samples

Because the MISSE 5 PEACE polymers were multi-purpose samples, only a portion of each sample
was bend-tested for strain-induced surface cracking. A piece measuring 0.5 in. (1.27 cm) x 0.2 in.

(0.508 cm) of each sample was sectioned for bend testing. The small salt particles were removed from the
samples prior to bend-testing by carefully brushing off the dust with a small horse-hair water color brush.
The salt was washed off a few samples (M-2, M-18, M-24, T-l, T-6) by rinsing with water and then
gently drying the sample with pressurized nitrogen.

Bend-Test Procedures

The samples were analyzed for space-induced embrittlement using a bend-test procedure in which a
surface strain was applied to the sample without adding overall tensile load. The strain necessary to
induce surface cracking was determined by bending the samples over mandrels. Bend-testing was
conducted using an apparatus with a semi-suspended pliable platform, and a set of mandrels varying in
NASA/TM—2012-217645 3

"
"8","diameter. A total of 23 mandrels were used, ranging in diameter from 1.253 to 0.052 cm. The diameter of
each mandrel was calculated by using the mean diameter obtained by averaging four measurements made
using Fowler & NSK MaX-Cal electronic digital calipers. Each sample was bend-tested using
successively smaller mandrels, with the sample being inspected after being bent around each mandrel.
This procedure was continued until cracks were Visible or until the sample did not experience any
cracking with the smallest mandrel, in which case the sample was recorded as having not cracked.

During bend-testing, the sample was placed with its space-exposed face down onto the semi-guided
apparatus. The mandrel was pushed down onto the sample, forcing the material to bend against a pliable
surface that spanned two supports 0n the apparatus. The sample was bent in a U-shape, where the space-
eXposed surface was in tension and the backside surface was under compression. As the diameter of the
mandrels decreased, the tension on the space-exposed surface of the sample increased because the sample
was forced to bend more tightly around the mandrel.

Optical microscopy was used to document any surface features in the bend-test area prior to testing,
and the same area was examined after bending around each mandrel to identify and document any
induced surface cracks. The samples were examined at magniﬁcations of approximately 10X to 13.8X
with an Olympus SMZ stereo—zoom optical microscope outﬁtted with a Canon digital camera. An
electronic coordinate system, the Boeckeler Microcode II Digital Readout, was used to ﬁnd the same test
location for microscopy examination before and after bend-testing at each mandrel, always centered at a
dot that had been marked on the sample so that it would always be bent in the same location. Depending
on the size of the sample, nine to ﬁfteen optical microscopy pictures of each sample were taken before
bending so that the entire bend-test sample was documented. When the sample was ﬁrst observed to crack
during the bend test process, the mandrel, and hence the strain, were recorded and the sample was not
tested further. If no cracks could be detected under the optical microscope, the sample was bend-tested
again with the next smaller mandrel, and the procedure was repeated. To verify the test results, several
samples were bend-tested more than once.

Strain Calculations

Equation (1) allows the percent strain (E) to be calculated based on the thickness of the sample (t) and
the diameter of the mandrel (d). This equation was derived from the bend-test conﬁguration shown in
Figure 3.

i t J
E = — x 100 (1)
d +t

The percent strain for each individual material, as stated before, was determined based on the mandrel

at which it initially cracked and the thickness of the sample.
Plathrm
Samw
Figure 3.—|||ustration of the bend-test
configuration showing a cradle platform
used to bend the sample around the
mandrel.
NASA/TM—2012-217645 4

"
"9","Results and Discussion

Two of the PEACE Polymers samples were found to have cracked in half While on-orbit: Sample T-1
polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA, 50.8 pm thick) and Sample X-2 polymethylpentent (PMP, 50.8 pm
thick). Close-up post-ﬂight photos of Samples T-1 and X-2 are shown in Figures 4(a) and (b), respectively.

The set of photos in Figure 5 is an example of the microscope images obtained before and after bend-
testing With each mandrel. The sample in Figure 5 is polyvinyl ﬂuoride (PVF), also known as clear Tedlar
(MISSE T-7). The box in each ﬁgure shows Where cracks developed during bend-testing. This 25.4 pm
thick sample cracked under a surface strain of only 0.38 percent.

While the PVF polymer shown in Figure 5 is representative of typical MISSE 5 PEACE polymer
behavior, With the formulation of very small but Visible vertical cracks, Figure 6 shows Sample X-2
(PMP), Which exhibited more extreme behavior. This is one of two samples that cracked on-orbit. It was
found to be extremely embrittled and fractured into pieces during bend-testing. In Figure 6 similar
features are circled to facilitate the comparison process. Space exposure embrittled this polymer to a
degree Where the sample fell apart upon bend-testing With the largest mandrel (1.25 cm dia.), Which
provided a surface strain of only 0.4 percent. Sample T-1, PMMA, also cracked With the largest mandrel
and fractured into pieces.

. cu Axiom

'. t 0 1 t I 0 i

i Hlli ‘
(a) (b)
Figure 4.—Post—flight photographs of cracked PEACE
samples: (a) Sample T-1, PMMA (left sample) and
(b) Sample X-2, PMP (right sample).
(a) (b) 7
Figure 5.—Sample T-7, PVF: (a) before bend-testing and (b) after bend-testing.

NASA/TM—2012—217645 5

"
"10",", , . _ . 1| . l v i . v
. C9 _ Q ' _ C) , _
l > ' ‘ . t
(a) (b)
Figure 6.—Sample X-2, PMP: (a) before bend-testing and (b) after bend-testing.
(a) (b)
Figure 7.—Sample T-5, PU: (a) before bend-testing and (b) after bend-testing.

An example of a sample that did not crack during bend-testing, and hence remained ductile, is shown
in Figure 7. This is Polyurethane (PU), MISSE 5 sample T-5. In summary, 17 0f the 37 ﬂight samples
experienced some degree of surface cracking during bend-testing, While none of the pristine samples
experienced any degree of surface cracking.

A list of the tested MISSE 5 PEACE samples, and their bend-test results, are provided in Table 1. In
Table 1, DNC means Did Not Crack. It should also be noted that bright White materials such as
Sample V-2, expanded polytetraﬂuoroethylene (ePTFE), would be particularly hard to see very ﬁne
surface cracks. Also, sample M-11, ﬂuorinated ethylene propylene, appeared to contain surface scratches
0r cracks prior to bend testing, Which may have impacted the bend-test results. Because the bend-test
procedure relies on optical microscopy for identiﬁcation of very small surface cracks, it is desirable to
verify these bend-test results by examining the bend-tested samples With scanning electron microscopy or
another technique that can verify the development of surface cracks.

The fact that surface strain induced cracking occurred in FEP (M-11), Kapton E (U-3), PTFE (V-3),
and TOR (V-S), and that UpileX-S (M-14) did not crack, is consistent With results by Miller and Dever
Who characterized the tensile properties of these same polymers ﬂown on the MISSE 5 Thermal Blanket
Experiment as part of the Polymer Film Thermal Control Experiment (PFTC) (Ref. 4).
NASA/TM—2012—217645 6

"
"11","TABLE 1.—MISSE 5 BEND-TESTING RESULTS
ID um strain
C stalline 01 Vin lﬂuoride w/white i ment PVF ,
Tetraﬂuoroeth lene hexaﬂuoro— r0 lene Vin lidene
(ISS cable materlal)
P01 tetraﬂuoroeth lene PTFE , PTFE T-lOO Vir in
50.8 0.40
aFEP had cracks in the surface before bend—testing
bePTFE is bright white and cracks may be hard to see
NASA/TM—2012-217645 7

"
"12","Summary and Conclusions
A study was conducted to characterize the embrittlement of thin ﬁlm polymers after exposure to the
space environment. In these investigations a bend test procedure was used to characterize the

embrittlement of 37 different polymers that were exposed to LEO aboard the 188 for 13 months in a

nadir-faeing orientation as part of the MISSE 5 PEACE polymers experiment. Using mandrels of

different diameters combined with optical microscopy, the strain necessary to induce surface cracking
was determined for ﬂight samples and compared with that of pristine samples. While none of the pristine
materials cracked at the highest strain available, 18 of the 37 ﬂight samples (49 percent) experienced
embrittlement, shown by surfaee-tensile-indueed cracking, after just 13 months of exposure in LEO. Two
of the polymers, PMMA and PMP, had cracked while on-orbit and were so brittle that they fractured
when bend-tested with the largest mandrel. These results indicate that many thin ﬁlm polymers are
susceptible to embrittlement in the LEO space environment, even after 10w solar and particle radiation
exposures. Therefore, even “minimal” amounts of radiation exposure must not be overlooked when
designing spacecraft components based on expected mechanical properties.

References

1. Dever, J .A., Banks, B.A., de Groh, K.K., Miller, S.K., Degradation of Spacecraft Materials
(Chapter 23), in Handbook of Environmental Degradation of Materials, Myer Kutz (editor), William
Andrew Publishing, pp. 465-501, 2005.

2. Townsend, J .A., Hansen, P.A., Dever, J .A., de Groh, K.K., Banks, B.A., Wang, L. and He, C.,
“Hubble Space Telescope Metallized Teﬂon FEP Thermal Control Materials: On-Orbit Degradation
and Post-Retrieval Analysis,” Special Issue: High Perform. Polym 11 (1999) 81-99.

3. de Groh, K.K., Banks, B.A., Dever, J .A., Jaworske, K.J., Miller, S.K., Seehkar, E.A. and Panko, S.R.,
“NASA Glenn Research Center’s Materials International Space Station Experiments (MISSE 1-7),”
Proceedings of the International Symposium on “SM/MPAC&SEED Experiment,” Tsukuba, J apan,
March 10-11, 2008, JAXA-SP-08-015E, March 2009, pp. 91—119; also NASA/TM—2008-215482,
December 2008.

4. Miller, S.K.R. and Dever, J .A., “Materials International Space Station Experiment 5 Polymer Film
Thermal Control Experiment,” J ournal of Spacecraft and Rockets, V01. 48, No. 2, Mareh—April 2011.

5. Walters, R]. et a1. “Forward Technology Solar Cell Experiment First On-Orbit Data,” 19th Space
Photovoltaic Research and Technology Conference, Brookpark, Ohio, September 20-22, 2005,
NASA/CP—2007-214494.

NASA/TM—2012-217645 8

"
"13",""
"14","Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE OMB NO. 0704-0188
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB
t | b .

girl‘EESEUETO ﬂOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.
1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 2. REPORT TYPE 3. DATES COVERED (From - TO)
01 —09—20 12 Technical Memorandum
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5a. CONTRACT NUMBER
Embrittlement of MISSE 5 Polymers After 13 Months of Space Exposure

5b. GRANT NUMBER

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
6. AUTHOR(S) 5d. PROJECT NUMBER
Guo, Aobo; Yi, Grace, T.; Ashmead, Claire, C.; Mitchell, Gianna, G.; de Groh, Kim, K.;
Banks’ Bruce’ A' 5e. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

WBS 90421104023017
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
National Aeronautics and Space Administration REPORT NUMBER
J ohn H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field 1348322
Cleveland, Ohio 44135—3 191
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 10. SPONSORING/MONITOR'S
National Aeronautics and Space Administration ACRONYWS)
Washington, DC 20546—0001 NASA

11. SPONSORING/MONITORING

REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2012-217645
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Unclassiﬁed-Unlimited
Subject Categories: 18 and 27
Available electronically at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 443-75 7-5 802
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
14. ABSTRACT
Understanding space environment induced degradation of spacecraft materials is essential when designing durable and stable spacecraft
components. As a result of space radiation, debris impacts, atomic oxygen interaction, and thermal cycling, the outer surfaces of space
materials degrade when exposed to low Earth orbit (LEO). The obj ective of this study was to measure the embrittlement of 37 thin ﬁlm
polymers after LEO space exposure. The polymers were ﬂown aboard the International Space Station and exposed to the LEO space
environment as part of the Materials International Space Station Experiment 5 (MISSE 5). The samples were ﬂown in a nadir-facing
position for 13 months and were exposed to thermal cycling along with low doses of atomic oxygen, direct solar radiation and omni-
directional charged particle radiation. The samples were analyzed for space-induced embrittlement using a bend-test procedure in which the
strain necessary to induce surface cracking was determined. Bend-testing was conducted using successively smaller mandrels to apply a
surface strain to samples placed on a semi-suspended pliable platform. A pristine sample was also tested for each ﬂight sample. Eighteen of
the 37 ﬂight samples experienced some degree of surface cracking during bend-testing, while none of the pristine samples experienced any
degree of cracking. The results indicate that 49 percent of the MISSE 5 thin ﬁlm polymers became embrittled in the space environment even
though they were exposed to low doses (~2.75 krad (Si) dose through 127 mm Kapton) of ionizing radiation.
15. SUBJECT TERMS
International Space Station (188); Spaceﬂight experiment; 10w Earth orbit (LEO); Space environment; Extraterrestrial radiation;
Environmental degradation; Polymer; Embrittlement
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON

ABSTRACT OF STI Help Desk (email:help@sti.nasa.gov)
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGES 19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (include area code)
U U EAGE UU 16 443—757—5802
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239-18

"
"15",""
"16",""
