"","x"
"1","SHORT COMMUNICATION
D ° V’ IA °t D ° Wlk' Aft
L Y D t. S f? ht g g
BRIAN T. PETERS, CHRIS A. MILLER, RACHEL A. BRADY,
JASON T. RICHARDS, AJITKUMAR P. MULAVARA, AND
JACOB J. BLOOMBERG
PETERS BT, MILLER CA, BRA]? RA, RilCHARDS 1le MULgAR? AP, offset Visual target usually consist of a combined sacca-
BLOOMBERG J]. Dynamic visua acuity uring wa ing a er ong- - -
duration spaceﬂight. Aviat Space Environ Med 2011; 82:463—6. Idlieyeband VOR.reSp10nge that Shlftsdgaﬁe onto a target.
Introduction: Astronauts experience alterations in gaze control as a t as. een plieVIOus y emonsjtrate t at EXPOSIOJI‘E! F0
result of adaptive Changes in eye-head coordination produced by micro— the mlcrograVIty Of SpaCEﬂlght Induces modlflcatlon 1n
gravity exposure. This may lead to potential Changes in postflight visual eye_head coordination during target acquisition (6)
acuity during head and body motion. Methods: We gathered dynamic Tar et ac uisition tasks re uirin coordination Of e e
visual acuity (DVA) data from 14 astronauts and cosmonauts after long- dg h dq h q h g d d d fy
duration (~6 mo)stays in space.Walking was used to induce self—motion an ea movements ave 5 Own egra e per. 01‘-
and visual acuity was determined by sequentially presenting Landolt manCe aDd the Presence 0f COTTECthe saccades, Partlcu'
ring optotypes on a computer display placed 4 m in front of subjects. larly for targets placed outside the central ﬁeld—Qf—View
Acuity assessments were made while seated (static condition) and walk- and located in the vertical plane requiring a pitch head
ing (dynamic condition) at 6.4 km ' h‘1 on a motorized treadmill. In t f t t . .t. 13 14 Ch .
each condition, a psychophysical threshold detection algorithm mini- movemen 01‘ arge vaUI81.10n ( ’ . )' anges 1n
mized the required number of optotype presentations by maximizing the these parameters after spaceﬂ1ght contrlbuted to a near
amount displayed around the subject’s acuity threshold. The difference doubling of the latency required to fixate peripheral tar-
between static and dynamic acuity measures provided a metric of gets (2).During the adaptation to space primates trained
Change in the subjects’ ability to maintain gaze fixation on the visual t f . 1’: t . .t. t, k th t . d
target while walking. Results: A decrement in postflight visual acuity 0 per orm a V1811? arge vaU1.Sl mm as a recluue
during walking was found. A mean dynamic acuity decrement of ap— accurate perceptlon 0f the perlpheral targets showed
proximately 0.75 eye-Chart lines was observed 1 d after returnihg from delays in the onset Of the gaze response and made Sig-
space. The population mean showed a consusteht Imp'rovement m DVA nificantly more errors in identifying the Visual charac-
performance during the first postfhght week. Discussmn: The recovery t . t. f . h It t (15)
curves for individual subjects did not necessarily follow a pattern of con- ens “ESP perlp era arge S . ' . .
tinuous improvement with each passing day. When adjusted for previous Def1c1ent gaze C0Dtr01 durlng PerlOdS 0f adapthe
long-duration flight experience, the population mean showed an unex- change, such as the first days Of microgravity exposure
pected DVA reduction'in the re-adaptation curye that is similar to recov- 01‘ re_exp05ure to a gravitational environment, could
ery patterns Observec‘ m pnsm adaptatlon StUd'es' cause oscillo sia (illusor movement of the Visual
Keywords: spaceflight, human locomotion, dynamic visual acuity, P . . y .
vestibulo_ocular reﬂex’ adaptation WOI'ld), blurI'Ed VISIOI’I, aHd decrements 1n DVA. In SUCh
cases, stationary objects may appear to bounce up and
down or move back and forth during head movements.
AZE CONTROL 0r ch estr at e d by the CNS is criti c a1 Visual disturbances like these could adversely affect the
Gto dynamic Visual a cuity (DVA) The gaz e stabiliza- performance of critical mission tasks: the successful
tion system coordinates movement of the eyes and hea d completion of extravehicular construction activities re-
so that a stable retinal image is maintained during head qtlmng, prec1se eye-hand. ceordmatlon (3911101 be Jeopar-
and body motion An important component of this con- dlzed; 1t may become d1ff1cult to read mstruments 0r
trol system is the vestibulo-Ocular reﬂex (VOR). VOR Tocate sw1tches 0,“ cohtrol panels; and the ab111ty to rap-
response properties are modified during and after space- 101,15] 65519.55 a veh1c1e 1n a1? emergency COUld be compro-
ﬂight, but the degree of adaptation varies among sub- mlsed. Slmply stated, mlss’lon subcess and crew safety
j e cts and experimental conditions (14). These data depend on a crewmember s ab111ty to see well. Earher
suggest that, initially on orbit and following the return
to Earth/ the VCR is continually in adaptive ﬂux! searCh' From Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering Group, Universities
ing for a new dynamic equilibrium. Under these CODdi- Space Research Association, and the Neuroscience Laboratories,
tions, the VCR maintains plasticity and, given sufficient NASA JOhnSO“ Space Centep Houston, TX- .
t. d t. 1 d. f' t _ t b1. h t b1 . . Thls manuscnpt was recelved for rev1ew 1n September 2010. It was
lmef’ a ap 1V6! y m0 1 les 0 re es a IS S a e VISIOD accepted for publication in January 2011.
durmg head perturbatlons. Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Brian T. Peters,
Gaze is the direction of the visual axis with respect to Ph.D., Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering Group, 1290 Hercules
- - - - - _ Drive, Houston, TX 77058; brian.peters-1@nasa.gov.
:ngftg {tiledeffllenaedd aarsldthﬁesalam Of iiiye position Wltht 1f Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association,
p . p05 on W1 respec 0 Alexandria, VA.
space. Coordmated eye-head movements toward an DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.2928.2011
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 82, N0. 4 - April 2011 463

"
"2","VISUAL ACUITY—PETERS ET AL.
work showed that DVA is reduced following long- DVA was measured using the technique we devel-
duration spaceﬂight (1). In this study, we aimed to oped for postﬂight astronaut and clinical assessment
better quantify that response by reporting DVA results (11). While subjects walked on the treadmill, Landolt C
using optometric standards. optotypes of various sizes were presented for 500 ms
and were oriented such that the opening of the ’C’ was
pointed in 1 of 4 directions—up, down, left, or right. The
METHODS laptop computer used to display the optotypes had a
There were 14 crewmernbers (astronauts/cosmonauts) pixel pitch of 0.19 mm. During the test, an operator en-
taking part in long-duration missions at the International tered the subject’s verbal responses Via an external nu-
Space Station of an average (i 95% confidence interval) meric keypad as each response was offered. Each data
duration of 185 (i 7.2) 01 who volunteered to participate entry cued the testing algorithm to immediately present
in this study Of the 14 subjects, 7 had prior long-duration the next optotype to the subject.
(~6 mo) spaceﬂight experience. There were 13 men and The orientation of the optotypes was presented pseu-
1 woman, and their ages ranged from 37 to 55 (mean = dorandomly, but size was determined by the subject’s
46) yr. All gave informed consent according to the re- success at correctly identifying the orientation of all pre-
quirements of the Committee for the Protection of Viously displayed optotypes. Optotype sizes, which
Human Subjects at NASA Johnson Space Center. varied uniformly from —0.4 to 1.0 logMAR (minimum
To evaluate the effect of spaceﬂight on DVA, data were angle resolvable) or 20/ 8 to 20 / 200 using the more
collected both pre- and postﬂight. The preﬂight testing familiar Snellen fractions, were possible for each ori-
schedule consisted of three separate Visits during the entation. The presentation size was determined by a
months preceding launch. A baseline for each subject forced-choice best parameter estimation by sequential
was determined from data collected during the final two testing algorithm, designed to rapidly converge on the
of these three Visits. Nominally, the postﬂight schedule acuity threshold by only presenting optotypes near the
consisted of five test sessions that were conducted on estimated acuity threshold. In order to present acuity
landing day and on days 1, 2, 3/4, and 6/ 7 after landing, changes resulting only from inadequate ocular compen-
according to crewmember availability. Only 3 of the sation, each dynamic acuity threshold was normalized.
14 subjects were available for testing on landing day; By subtracting the static acuity threshold obtained each
only 1 of those was able to complete the treadmill—walking test day, changes in subjects’ underlying acuity and dif-
protocol (~4 h after landing). ferences in the Visual conditions (e.g., ambient light
Visual acuity thresholds were determined for static levels) were accounted for.
(i.e., seated) and dynamic (i.e., walking) trials. For both
conditions, computer-generated Landolt-C optotypes
were presented on a laptop positioned at eye level 4 m RESULTS
directly in front of the subjects. This was deemed suffi- Fig. 1 shows dynamic Visual acuity data from 14 crew-
cient to avoid engaging linear VOR mechanisms, which members after their return from long-duration (~6 mo)
are known to engage at Viewing distances closer than stays in space. These data show a decrement in post-
2 m (10). Walking trials were completed at 6.4 km - h‘1 ﬂight walking acuity. With the timescale fixed relative to
on a motorized treadmill. This speed was considered landing, the population mean shows a consistent im-
fast enough to be challenging without encroaching on a provement in DVA performance during the postﬂight
walk-run transition. During walking trials, subjects recovery period.
wore a harness that was attached to an overhead gantry. In the figure, data are normalized to the subjects’ pre-
The harness provided no support and did not interfere ﬂight DVA values, which are represented on the y-axis
with natural movement during normal walking. A spot- at 0. The error bars in the figure represent the 95% confi-
ter monitored subjects to ensure their safety. dence interval of the mean for each test day. Therefore,
A minimum of 28 optotype presentations at each test postﬂight test days on which error bars do not intersect
session were required to determine a stable DVA thresh- the y-axis at 0 indicate days that DVA performance sig-
old. The actual number of presentations used to calcu- nificantly differed from preﬂight values.
late the threshold was determined by the subjects’ Recovery curves for individual subjects did not neces-
response rates and the total number of walking trials. sarily follow a pattern of continuous improvement with
Nominally, six 30-s walking trials were completed. Tri- each passing day. We observed that subjects recovered
als were limited to 30 s to minimize fatigue. During and readapted at different rates, introducing noticeable
the between-trials breaks, the DVA test was effectively variation in the group’s recovery curves, particularly on
”paused.” In cases where fewer than 6 walking trials postﬂight day 2. On this day, some subjects appeared to
were performed, the minimum of 28 optotypes was al- improve while others showed a decrement. To better un-
ways exceeded. At the onset of each trial, a few strides derstand this disparity, which we believed could be at-
were permitted to allow subjects to become comfortable tributed to individual differences in adaptation rates,
with the speed and attain a steady gait. After a verbal the data for the seven subjects with previous long-duration
”ready” indication from the subject, the DVA task was spaceﬂight experience were replotted after imposing an
initiated and data collection was begun with the subject artificial 1-d 1’delay” in their recoveries. This temporal
continuing to walk and perform the Visual task. shift reduced the response variability and revealed a
464 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 82, N0. 4 - April 2011

"
"3","VISUAL ACUITY—PETERS ET AL.
3 A 3
73 8
g 25 g g 2.5 0
g E
.C .C
$ 2 3 2
a a
C .E l
g 1.5 8 1.5 , A
g $
9 1 9 1 N _
z 0.5 $\ew swap \‘4 < 0-5 § % aeg®« .
> "" \ I Y's‘ 9b” E “A AR
0 IA\\ ‘1» ?«ms- A 1 A» --m
'0 0 x . 1 q.‘ :‘2‘ 8 0 v' “
.“s’ ‘7"" \ 2' V ‘
E -o.5 g ""0-5
5 <23
-1 -1
0 1 2 3/4 6/7 0 1 2 3/4 6/7
Days Postflight Days Postflight
Fig. 1. Dynamic visual acuity data obtained from walking subjects Fig. 2- Dynamicvisual acuitydataafteratemporalshiftof1 d 15 made
following long-duration spaceflight. Error bars represent a 95% confi- for the seven crewmembers that had PFEViOUS long-duration spaceflight
dence interval. experience. Error bars represent a 95% confidence interval.
change in the morphology of the group recovery curve spaceﬂight, but we believe these results may signifi-
to one that 1) produced a greater decrement in postﬂight cantly underestimate the decrements invisual performance
day 1 performance, and 2) showed an unexpected DVA re- that are actually experienced during and immediately fol-
duction in the group’s recovery curve at day 3 / 4 (Fig. 2). lowing landing. One study limitation was that, with the
exception of one subject, all of our DVA data were col-
DISCUSSION lected no earlier than 24 h after the landing. Given how
Postﬂight changes in gaze control produced decreases rapidly gaze control re-adapts, we suspect that the dec-
in DVA during walking for 14 subjects following long- rement in Visual acuity at the actual time of landing was
duration exposure to microgravity. Each successive eye- lil<ely much higher than what we measured at our first
chart line represents an increase in optoytpe size of postﬂight data collection sessions. Ideally, returning
roughly 25%. Therefore, the subject that showed a 2.5 crewmembers would be tested immediately upon land-
line change would require that font sizes be increased ing, but their schedules during those critical postﬂight
by over 60% in order to see with equal clarity during the hours precluded this. The test paradigm also presented
given walking conditions. The population mean showed a best-case scenario for successful optotype recognition
a consistent improvement in DVA performance during because optotypes were displayed for 500 ms, enough
the week-long postﬂight recovery period, although the time to encompass a full step cycle, including periods
individual recovery rates varied. when head velocity would have been zero. Stride cycle
When data for the seven subjects with previous long- timing has been shown to inﬂuence target acquisition
duration spaceﬂight experience were shifted by a day success (12), so we suspect it also plays a role in acuity.
(Fig. 2), group recovery curves aligned in a manner that The test could be made more sensitive by restricting the
suggests these subjects were 1 d ahead of the others in optotype display duration to periods when head veloc-
their recoveries. The unexpected DVA reduction that ap- ity is higher, for example, during heel-strike events. A
pears in the group’s recovery curves on day 3 / 4 is simi- third consideration is that walking is an active, well-
lar to one observed following prism adaptation in which practiced activity and feed-forward control mechanisms
the aftereffect showed two separate time courses of de- facilitate it by producing compensatory eye movements.
cay and increase (3). Hatada et al. (3) suggested that this Therefore, a walking DVA test probably underestimates
behavior could be caused by two separate underlying the amount of decrement in Visual performance that
neural mechanisms with different time scales. In our ap- would be expected during passive, unpredictable mo-
plication, it suggests a more complex readaptation pro- tion, such as would occur during a landing when crew-
cess than simply a gradual return to ”normal” following members are strapped into a moving vehicle.
spaceﬂight. This report addresses the effect of long-duration space-
Our data show changes in the ability of crewmem- ﬂight on far target DVA, but effects on near target acuity
bers to Clearly see Visual targets while walking after are equally important for different reasons. Consider a
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 82, N0. 4 - April 2011 465

"
"4","VISUAL ACUITY—PETERS ET AL.
piloting or navigational task as an example. Instrument ACIOfNOWLkEDGMENTS d b ( ) d h
- - - - - - T is wor was supporte y NASA Experiment E120 an t e
CODtrOlS InSIde the vehlde,are,located In Close proximity National Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA NCC
to a crewmember, necessitating near target acuity for 9-58.
mission success. Whereas a far target task requires com- None of the authors have any financial or personal relationships
. . . ence IS wor .
challenge requues (PompenSOatlon for ““191 head trans- Authors and affiliations: Brian T. Peters, Ph.D., Chris A. Miller, M.S.,
lations. In a test 0fV1sua1 acuity under conditlons of whole Rachel A Brady, M.S., and Jason T. Richards, M.S., Wyle Integrated
body GZ vibration, O’Briant and Ohlbaum (9) found the Science and Engineering Group, Houston, TX; Ajitkumar P. Mulavara,
most significant factor contributing to Visual performance Ph.D., Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX; and
d t t t d. t I t 't' t th t Jacob J. Bloomberg, Ph.D., Neuroscience Laboratories, NASA Johnson
eeremen s was arge 1s ance. n m ion sugges s a Space Center, Houston, TX.
objects are easier to see when they are closer, but in the
presence of self-motion this is only true for purely rota- REFERENCES
tional movements of the headO During rotations, the re- 1. Bloomberg J], Mulavara AP. Changes in walking strategies after
quired ocular compensation angle remains relatively 2 GOispjrcegﬁgkgﬁEwiEaggfkhfegngﬁi 3212:; Zaz‘ﬁﬁg'armin V A
constant regardless of Viewing distance. For translational ' Ereibich YIV. The vestigumﬂebeuyar rlegulation Of
movements Of the Observer, the required ocular compensa- oculomotor reactions in microgravitational conditions. In:
tion angle increases as the target is brought closer to the K9111“ EL, Zee D5, eif- Agapﬁlvlf PIOCESSEOSO 1“ “1558961 193d
eyes. An efficient angular VOR facilitates gaze stabiliza- 3811 omOtor SyStemS' 6W or ' ergamon ress’ ' _
tion during rotational movements, but a rudimentary 3. Hatada Y, Miall RC, Rossetti y. Two waves of a long-lasting
linear VOR does so during translations (8 ’10), This can lead afteOreffect of prism adaptation measured over 7 days. Exp
t d r m nt in Vi ual rf rman in n rmal ub' t Bram Res 2006; 169417—26
“(jheerf XSieX/iins nears tar 1::8 21min CiransfationaT mfg: 4. Herdman S], Hall CD, Schubert MC, Das VE, Tusa R]. Recovery
g . g g . of dynamic Visual acuity in bilateral vestibular hypofunction.
ments. Our prev10us ground-based work has shown thlS Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2007; 133:383—9.
to be the case (11). Acuity decrements become more sig- 5- Herdman 5L SFhubert MC, 1395 VE/ T959 RJ- Recovery of dynamic
nificant in these conditions for patients With abnormal Vlsual acu1ty 1n un11ateral vest1bular hypofunctlon. Arch
, , Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2003; 129:819—24.
OtOhth funCtlon (7); 50 we eXPeCt the same WOUld be true 6. Kozlovskaya IB, Barmin VA, Kreidich Yu V, Repin AA. The effects
for returning astronauts whose eye-head coordination is of real and simulated microgravity on vestibulo-oculomotor
still readjusting to a 1-G environment. Both far and near mteracu‘m- Phy31010g15§1985I°28<6l 511191919551—6;
Visual acuit erformance are therefore re uired for 7. Lempert T, Wolsley C, Dav1es R, Gresty MA, Bronsteln AM. Three
y P O O ’ O ’ O q. O hundred sixty-degree rotation of the posterior semicircular
safe, successful mlsswns: near aculty for pllotmg, naVI- canal for treatment of benign positional vertigo: a placebo-
gational, and manual tasks; far acuity for terrestrial ex- O controlled trial- NeurOology 1997; 492729—33. O
P1 orati 0n and return t 0 normal activities up on return. 8. L1ao K, Walker MF,]osh1A, Reschke M, Lelgh R]. Vestlbulo-ocular
, , responses to verticle translation in normal human subjects. Exp
It naturally fOHOWS that we are also interested III under— Brain Res 2008; 185:553—62.
standing hOW self—motion and the resulting DVA decre- 9. O’Briant CR, Ohlbaum MK. Visual acuity decrements associated
ments affect target acquisition time after prolonged V151”: £381Z1b$§§1us 01"" mmus GZ Vlbratlon Stress- AerOSP
. . . . e ; : — .
micrograwty exposure. Decreased aCUIty can lead to mls- 10. Paige GD. The inﬂuence of target distance on eye movement
perceptlon Of sensory informatlon and pose a unique S€t Of responses during vertical linear motion. Exp Brain Res 1989;
problems for crewmembers during entry, approach, and 77:585—93. O O O O
landings 0n planetary surfaces. The ability to successfully 11‘ 1363:1366?tgigggbﬁgali)tggrrlgﬁggl‘ggggl $513532, H78mg far and
read and interface WlOth vehOlde instrument Panels durmg 12. Peters BT, van Emmerik RE, Bloomberg J]. Stride cycle inﬂuences
these tasks IS imperatlve. Us1ng bigger font SlzeS 0n instru- on goal-directed head movements made during walking. Gait
ment panels is not necessarily a Viable solution. Even when Posture 2006; 24370—6-
the font is big enough to be seen, oscillopsia could increase 13‘ RESChke MF’ Bloomberg 11' .Harm D.L' HuEbner WE KmaVEk JM'
, , , , , et a1. V13ual-vest1bular 1ntegrat10n as a functlon of adapta-
the flxatlon tlme requued to see 1t tion to space ﬂight and return to earth. Houston: NASA/
Dynamic Visual acuity has been shown to successfully JSC; 1999.
gauge the efficacy of vestibular rehabilitation paradigms 14- Reﬁée 13ml Komllova LE, Harm DL'O Blgomﬁérg 1% P £1031:
. eurosensory an sensory-mo or unc 10n. n: eac
(4’5) QurOreSUItS suggeSt that’ used atone’ far target DVA Huntoon CS, Antipov VV, Grigoriev AI, eds. Space biology and
IS a practlcal way to GValuate postﬂlght recovery prog- medicine. Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and
ress as well. For reasons stated, though, we believe an O Astronautics 19962135-93- O
even more useful assessment Of postﬂight Visual perfor- 15. Slrota MG, Babayev BM, Beloozerova IB, Nyrova AN, Yakushln
, , SB, et a1. Characteristics of vestibular reactions to canal and
mance WOtlld be one comprised Of anOr Oand near dynamlc otolith stimulation at an early stage of exposure to microgravity.
Visual acuity as well as target acquisition time. Physiologist 1987; 30(1, Suppl.)582—4.
466 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 82, N0. 4 - April 2011

"
