"","x"
"1","AIAA 2016-2306
SpaceOps Conferences ®
16-20 May 2016, Daejeon, Korea
SpaceOps 2016 Conference
ngzémgrk
moblPV: A New, Wearable Real-Tlme Collaboratlon
Software for Astronauts Us1ng Moblle Computlng Solutlons
A. Boyd1 and A. Fortunate2
European Astronaut Centre, Cologne, Nordrhein Weszfalen, 51147, Germany and
M. Wolff3 and D. Martinez Oliveira4
European Space Research and T echnology Centre, Noordwijk, Zuid—Holland, 2201, The Netherlands
o mobiPV is an innovative wearable and mobile procedure Viewer, Which gives astronauts
E a truly hands-free operations environment and provides them With an instantaneous, direct
é two-way link With the experts on ground. In turn, the system provides the ground With an
g exact View of the procedure being executed, including current step marker position, as well
E as an “astronaut eye View” of the task at hand. All the hardware is Commercial Off the Shelf
E (COTS) whereby a custom software runs on a smartphone, linked to a wearable head-
5 mounted camera, an audio headset and, optionally, a mobile tablet. Astronauts can navigate
a) through the procedure using either voice commands or the smartphone/tablet touchscreen.
g A multimedia collaboration environment is available: the crew and ground can exchange
'3 audio, text and Video notes as well as activate either audio-only or full two-way Video
:5 communication. All data exchanges are conducted over IP and rely on the Multipurpose
4% Computer and Communication (MPCC) system. mobiPV has been successfully tested during
g the NEEMO 19 and NEEMO 20 underwater ‘aquanaut’ missions in 2014 and 2015 as well as
a during the ESA iriss Mission 0n the International Space Station (188), With the plan to
§ validate increasingly complex experiment utilisation scenarios during future increments on-
2 board the 188. In general, mobiPV has been shown to improve astronaut efﬁciency and
E greatly reduce the time lost suspending an activity to consult laptop/tablet/paper instructions
E at each step in the procedure. The system also eliminates ground guesswork of What step the
g crew is currently working on. This paper describes the ISS ﬂight crew operations of this new
(L3 real-time collaboration software using wearable, mobile computing solutions and its
E effectiveness in human spaceﬂight operations.
2
<5
§
‘z‘
E
B
2?:
Q
1 Eurocom, Crew Operations Unit, Human Spaceﬂight and Robotic Exploration (D/HRE-A), Andrea.B0yd@esa.int
2 Deputy Head, Crew Operations Unit, Human Spaceﬂight and Robotic Exploration (D/HRE-A), Antonio.Fortunat0@esa.int
3 mobiPV Principal Investigator, Software and Technology Department, Technical and Quality Management (D/TEC—S),
Mikae1.W01ff@esa.int
4 mobiPV Lead Engineer, Software and Technology Department, Technical and Quality Management (D/TEC-S),
David.Martinez.Oliveira@esaint
1
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2016 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","I. Introduction
THE 188 program goal of radically increasing crew working time on utilization tasks (i.e. science and
technology development) is a challenge to be met on many fronts. For example, performance improvement for
crew manual tasks such as system maintenance activities and payload set-up/tear down is required, Whilst the
anomaly resolution process must also be optimized. A crew informatics response to this efﬁciency challenge was to
create a mobile procedure Viewer (mobiPV).
The initial design goals of mobiPV were formulated as:
a) embrace terrestrial mobile and wearable technology so that the required ground support to crew members is
always at hand at the work site;
b) improve situational awareness and real-time collaboration between crew and ground expert(s) through a
“shared workspace” While operations are in progress.
8
g A. mobiPV Overview .
§ At its core, mobiPV is a procedure Viewer enhanced With productivity and collaboration services. In this
§ context, procedures are the standard Operations Data Files (ODF) used on-board the International Space Station for
if all non—triVial crew activities. mobiPV is compatible With the on—board procedure library containing all validated
E ODFs applicable to crew activities.
0
20 The current mobiPV implementation consists of a ﬂight and a ground segment composed exclusively of
g Commercial-Off—The-Shelf (COTS) hardware. The application software runs on Linux based OSs (Android on-
3 board and Ubuntu on ground) and is fully customized.
3 Data links permitting* (i.e. availability of the Ku IP Services (Ku IPS)), mobiPV supports a real-time
g collaboration environment (a “shared workspace”) for the distributed ﬂight operations team: the astronauts together
2“ With their support team on the ground. This collaborative conﬁguration is well suited to contingency operations and
3;» has the potential to signiﬁcantly shorten any anomaly resolution process.
5: mobiPV provides the following main crew productivity and collaboration services:
E 1) procedure voice navigation, enabling hands-busy support;
(”3 2) real time Video streaming of workplace activities (“astronaut eye View”);
(:3 3) real-tiIne space-to-ground communications;
E5 4) procedure execution progress synchronization between ﬂight and ground users (i.e. the green step marker is
E always at the same position on all connected systems);
a 5) multimedia annotation of procedure steps (text, images, audio and/or Video clips).
0
(:5: These services are available, can be initiated on the
a ground as well as on-board, and the implementation of this
g application software relies on standard IP network protocols. o H‘
3 During real-time operations ground and ﬂight mobiPV > <
E systems are connected locally to identical ODF ﬂight , .
5 libraries thereby avoiding a high bandwidth demand on Ku Smartphone Wearab'e
IPS for loading procedures and synchronizing them as per 1 _
item 4 above. —_ i
B. Hardware Conﬁgurations g '
The current implementation involves peer-to-peer d
connection of one ﬂight system With one ground system. The 9
ﬂight system can be conﬁgured in two ways: . ' '
a) Prime (Figure 1): the user wears a smartphone on 'u‘
the cuff and complements it With Google Glass for #
audio, Video and auxiliary display functions. Laptop Tab'et
Figure 1. mobiPV devices. Prime Conﬁguration.
* When Ku IPS is not available, mobiPV can be used in stand-alone mode.
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","b) Alternate: the smartphone is complemented With a head-worn webcam and a simple rnono headset With
speaker and microphone.
In both such conﬁgurations an iPad can be used as ;«H_
assistive display. As in Figure 2, for example, its larger x, : 2.121.810LABTCUI&2MAF """"""""““‘""‘___
screen size provides the user With a better operational ....._.__ --.-.~.+ __
context (rnore instructions around the current one are wbmmeammsandexchangeonmambmus.1.3.137;
available at a glance) and allows images and Video clips —
to be displayed in larger formats. The Google Glass head 5 .V 11*}
mounted display also works as an assistive display “—4? 1.3; "" “-1.: a_ 1:- ‘
however, due to its limited size, it can only render one J ”ML £3,“ km I
o instruction at any given time. I W a .. g6, ‘35 x
E. Notwithstanding the Wired connections of the headset u-
E and camera in the alternate conﬁguration, all internal Figure 2. iPad Assistive Display. Procedure images
g rnobiPV device communication links are Wireless. The automatically popup 0n the assistive tablet, while
in external data/Video/audio links to/from the smartphone and remaining hidden to save screen Space on the
2 an ISS Wireless base station are also Wireless. smartphone.
o
2 The ground rnobiPV is composed of a laptop With a Wired webcam and a Wireless Bluetooth rnono headset. The
E underlying software architecture allows for additional peripherals (e.g. barcode reader, Wireless serial data transfer
§ dongle), as well as a full port to future mainstream COTS mobile devices. In addition the current architecture
if already allows for a rnulti-node rnobiPV system in operations, Where one or many ﬂight systems can be connected
3% With one or many ground systems to support larger team operations efforts.
\0
i ll. COTS Technology on ISS
2;) There is an increasing trend to use COTS hardware solutions in crew informatics systems for human spaceﬂight.
g This approach has pros and cons compared With traditional custom hardware development.
m
E The main advantages are:
C: a) No development time. Products are market ready and no additional effort needed on hardware development.
2-5 h) Physically appealing. Commercial products have a better ﬁnish than bespoken solutions. Even though not a
(3 technical advantage, this feature has a positive impact on user acceptance.
8 c) Farniliarization. Most crew members use on a daily basis a score of consumer electronic devices such as
E srnartphones, tablets, smart watches, etc. Therefore the familiarization process With a neW system that includes
3 them is both easier and faster.
T: (1) Compliance to standards. Commercial products have to fulﬁl many different norms and standards to be
E allowed on the market. Products already certiﬁed according to such standards can usually go through a faster
g space qualiﬁcation process.
3; e) State of the art technology. In general, custom hardware development takes time and in an era of quick
ED obsolescence of consumer electronics this translates in systems becoming outdated even before their ﬁrst use.
On the other hand, the adoption of COTS solutions has a few drawbacks:
a) The success and efﬁciency of the space qualiﬁcation process heavily depends on support provided by the
manufacturer. This is sometimes difficult to obtain When commercial devices currently on the market are
involved, as companies tend to keep the details of their designs secret, making it difﬁcult to disclose the
information required for the space qualiﬁcation process, even under NDAs.
b) COTS hardware is normally highly optimized. It is rare to ﬁnd a modular COTS design to Which the
application of small customizations is possible. Furthermore, such optimizations, aimed at a speciﬁc consumer
market, rarely satisfy operational requirements for space applications. This usually has negative impact When
modifying it for space in regards to system setup, ergonomics and comfort.
0) Correspondingly, there are no COTS devices for space applications. The device is intended for something
else and therefore, has an impact either on the qualiﬁcation process (removing srnartphone radio chips) or in the
interfacing process (no serial port on mobile devices).
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","d) The previous points also extend into the software area. COTS devices, like tablets or phones, come with
their own software. Some parts of that software are proprietary and cannot be easily modiﬁed. Access to certain
features from external applications may be difﬁcult and require signiﬁcant effort and investigation from the
system developers.
C. COTS on 188
More and more COTS solutions have been adopted in recent years on-board the ISS. BSA, for instance, has been
using COTS solutions for some years. In 2009, the WEarable Augmented Reality (WEAR)ii technology
demonstrator was ﬂown on 188. This system, like InobiPV was completely based on COTS devices.
Another more modest (hardware-wise) project involving COTS hardware was the CRew User Interface System
Enhancement (CRUISE) experiment (2013)“1. In this case a COTS headset was qualiﬁed to be used in the evaluation
of voice commanding technologies onboard.
g Beside fully ﬂedged COTS devices (phones, tablets, etc), there is also a trend in industry to exploit emerging
8 technologies as well as low-Cost electronics devices. An example of the former is the use of 3D-printed elements.
5 An example of the latter is the AstroPI technological demonstrator currently tested during the Principia mission that
g makes use of a Raspberry Pi enhanced with different kinds of sensors.
2 The combination of these technologies appears as an interesting Inid-point in the spectrum running from custom
g hardware development to COTS devices.
3 D. COTS in mobiPV
g The InobiPV project involved COTS devices since the very early stages of development. The main goal of the
i; proj eet is to improve mobility and explore the possibilities inherent to wearable technologies, therefore, the selection
2 of a mobile phone was the logical choice.
i Speciﬁcally, a Nexus 5 was selected because, of all the devices available, it was the only one of its type with
2;) some vendor support to customize the software. Moreover, the manufacturer’s ofﬁces in Europe also helped to
E qualify the rechargeable Li-Ion battery and remove the radio ampliﬁers to avoid interference from eell-network
g; bands. The Nexus 5 is the central element of InobiPV and it proved to be an important asset for the project.
E However, it is interesting to note that, as mentioned above, it was not possible to strictly use it “Off The Shelf”.
LU
U
8 Another major InobiPV component is Google Glass. At the beginning, the device was deemed promising
é because of its small size and simple setup. Its qualiﬁcation, however, proved difﬁcult, and the drawbacks of the ﬁnal
% result outweighed the main advantages of the device. In this case, in fact, it was not possible to obtain manufacturer
% support for battery qualiﬁcation. The workaround was to modify the device by removing the original battery and use
9 instead an existing space qualiﬁed re-Chargeable battery, provided by NASA. This modiﬁcation was possible thanks
i to the efforts of ESTEC engineering personnel.
2
‘3 The use of 3D printing technology proved to be necessary for both devices. In the ease of the smartphone, a wrist
é attachment was 3D printed in order to support the original concept of a cuff worn device. For Google Glass it was
E necessary to 3D print a cover for the display prism such that, if it were to shatter during transportation, any piece of
5 glass would be contained within. In fact, the cover made the display prism compliant with COLUMBUS/ISS safety
requirements.
The rest of the InobiPV components (head mounted camera, headset, cabling, Chargers) didn’t pose any major
issue and could be used as-is.
E. Interfacing with Current [88 Technology
InobiPV interfaces with two main ISS systems: the on-board wireless network and the MPCC. The former
provides connectivity to a number of different services, for instance the IPV server containing all the on-board
procedures. The latter is still under development but, in principle, it is intended to enable point to point TCP/IP
connectivity between ground and ﬂight segments and enable the so-Called Class III payload operations. (A Class III
payload can conceptually be operated by its user from any place where an internet connection supported by Ku IPS
and MPCC services are available). InobiPV does not fully ﬁt the deﬁnition of a Class III payload due to its bi-
4
Ameriean Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","directional real-time audio/Video capability and therefore, interfacing with the MPCC system was a challenge
especially for some system functionalities.
III. Underwater Operational Veriﬁcation

The success of any hardware/software solution is largely determined by how much user feedback is collected
during development and how well this is incorporated in the ﬁnal product. Such feedback is essential to tweak the
user interface, improve performance, ﬁnd and eliminate bugs, as well as identify which features are worthwhile and
which are better left out. This is especially important with a system providing enhanced real-time collaboration in
the complex technical and operational environment of the International Space Station.

Awareness of this fundamental principle has characterized mobiPV since its inception. Already in the very early
development stages, informal user evaluation sessions were conducted at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne
to collect feedback from astronauts as well as ground support personnel. As the system matured and grew

§ increasingly more complex, those user evaluations were formalized and became important project milestones. The
:3 typical evaluation scenario involved the execution, with the aid of mobiPV, of a real ﬂight procedure focused on
g hands-busy, complex operations where astronauts would beneﬁt the most from a wearable system and a closer
E collaboration with the “ground”.
N
3 Those evaluations provided frequent, valuable feedback but lacked a few fundamental elements: the activities
8 were executed in “stand-alone” laboratory conditions rather than in the framework of a tight activity plan and in a
g realistic, space-like operational environment.
g In order to ﬁll this gap, at least partially, two special user evaluations were run by astronauts and ﬂight
E; controllers inside Aquarius, an underwater habitat twenty miles off the coast of Florida, in the framework of the
5 NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO) program. A ﬁrst test was conducted in summer 2014
go during NEEMO 19, followed a year later by a second one during NEEMO 20.
N
2;) The relevance of those tests cannot be overstated. NEEMO provides what is probably the closest space-like
E operational environment not involving rocket propulsion. Aquanauts are conﬁned for one to two weeks in a
55 pressurized habitat 20m (65ft) under the surface of the sea. They have a busy schedule and are supported in real-
; time by a Mission Control Centre. Schedule pressure, isolation, limited communication infrastructure, as well as a
<2) real component of risk combine in a unique mix that has been exploited over the years to test a number of precursor
3:) technologies.
52
§ ' w ‘ .~ F. NEEMO 19
§ - t, “H ~ ; 'i In NEEMO 19 a mobiPV prototype was put
0 Q 7 .
j: ‘ . I . __ _ ' through 1ts paces by ESA astronaut Andreas
g0: ' i I mm ,,._,,—::;; ; :: g I Mogensen (who later checked-out the ﬁnal system
E i T 13255 5 E l l'. n in space during the iriss mission) and BSA
4: i ‘9. _ . . . . . . A , ,
8 “$93 ' 2::::;;;; .. ‘ ’(sasa 1nstructor Herve Stevenln.
% j :2::::::::::. ~
g b ::::::::::::: 1“"" - . . .
g 3 ' gggg§§§:::::; . In th1s test, the prime system conﬁguratlon was
Q 9 1 {33333555555 used. The smartphone was as usual the centrepiece
O """"""""Iz:zz . of the system, with Google Glass covering the
g P e function of head mounted camera, assistive display
"" - . and headset, and the iPad providing an additional
\ ,, ‘ ,: . , I , assistive display with large screen real-estate. The
v r ‘ $4M ' activity executed with mobiPV as can be seen in
‘v a Figure 3 was Skin-B, a real scientiﬁc protocol
’ . normally performed by astronauts in space.
Figure 3. NEEMO 19 Aquarius underwater habitat. The test involved the veriﬁcation of all rnobiPV
Mogensen using mobiPV prime conﬁguration to perform main features: step marker synchronisation,
Skin-B, a procedure currently used on the [SS (ESA). multimedia note exchange and real-time audio/Video
interaction with a ground operator located at the
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","NEEMO Mission Control Centre. The overall results of NEEMO 19 were encouraging. mobiPV clearly showed the
potential for enhanced space-to-ground collaboration: a tighter integration between the efforts of crew and mission
control resulting in a more efﬁcient use of crew time. The test was also useful to identify areas of improvement:
voice commanding, Google Glass limited battery life, as well as the need for a networking protocol that would better
cope with limited bandwidth and frequent outages.
G. NEEMO 20
ESA astronaut Luca Parmitano, together with NASA astronauts Serena ~J~ ’- 7; ”‘ ‘ "" c"" ‘
Aunon and Dave Coan (Figure 4) as well as JAXA astronaut Norishige K). | ‘ 0‘3 ,1? , , ‘
Kanai evaluated in the summer of 2015 an updated version of mobiPV . . , T44“ ‘ -”.
during NEEMO 20. This time the alternate conﬁguration was chosen: the ‘i ,1 ‘3’ .3"" ‘ k \K‘ ”
smartphone was complemented by a head mounted camera, a wired ‘ “v’ ,4 r 7"" 7 . 3:. F
headset and an iPad. The activity executed was again Skin-B, thus \3 \ f E? 7 - '”
allowin more meanin ful corn arisons with NEEMO 19. a .. ii”
”é Apart from an updated software, the main novelty of NEEMO 20 was ”i A. "" 7 5.
g the veriﬁcation of a simulated multi-centre collaboration setup. The s e ‘5
g» aquanauts did not rely any longer just on mission control, but could also
3 interface with Skin-B activity experts located at the European Astronaut Figure 4- NEEMO 20 Aquarius. C061”
<2 Centre in Cologne as shown in Figure 5. wearing mobiPV i"" the alternate
E .. -____ l I conﬁgurationfor Skin-B (NASA).
g 3 r-ZW . ' Once more the evaluation
'§ ‘ 3:” - m 9 results were encouraging: the system was deﬁnitely more mature than
if - l’ ”5 in NEEMO 19 and could better cope with the difﬁcult network
g 1 ”' environment of Aquarius. Moreover, the simulated multi-centre setup
g ‘ proved to be a valuable addition. On the other hand, problems still
i ' persisted with the voice recognition and the cables connecting the
2;) L“ i; i t , A 7 various hardware turned out to be quite cumbersome.
: <~ ‘ ,- ,
E 4'“ , i."" ,. ,H.‘ TV Figure 5. Live multi—centre operations. Kanai underwater in
E44 7 '31“: 3 ”7 f3] "" 1.1 J! . r” Aquarius works Simultaneously with CAPCOM Stevenin in Florida,
a ” \_ * USA and Skin-B payload Specialists in Cologne, Germany (ESA).
E
% IV. Spaceﬂight Operational Veriﬁcation
a The initial activities on the ISS aimed to systematically test each of the mobiPV features for both conﬁgurations.
Q The tests were slated for Andreas Mogensen during his 10day mission in September 2015”.
(2‘
E: H. International Space Station
g On the International Space Station, the crew work to very tight schedules. In this environment mobiPV was
$3 envisioned to be extremely useful to save crew time, increase accuracy and make it easier for crew to take on any
E task while keeping both hands free. A key feature for ground controllers is the ability to know exactly where crew is
8 in the procedure thus eliminating the current guesswork, which is anyway only possible when cabin Video or
telemetry from the equipment being operated is available.
mobiPV enables new ways of interaction, including a direct connection between the crew member on board and
the activity experts on ground. The idea is to complement the current approach where the Flight Control Team
“owns” all S/G communications and acts as intermediary between the astronauts and the principle investigators or
payload developers on ground. In order to make this direct interaction possible whi1st sti11keeping the Flight Control
Team aware of what is happening, redistribution of the mobiPV internal Video/audio channels is necessary. Those
channels are carried as IP trafﬁc through the MPCC and then further redistributed on ground to feed them into the
standard 188 distribution system and make it available to the various control centres.
As mentioned, mobiPV was designed to enable multi-party collaboration models and therefore, enabling the
different parties involved in an activity to have their own mobiPV unit with the ability to monitor and interactively
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","join the on-going session. This whole concept, when fully deployed, will enable a more integrated solution for the
whole mission team situational awareness.

Since Andreas Mogensen’s Soyuz had to adopt a longer rendezvous (Two days instead of siX hours) and docking
proﬁle, the original ten day docked mission was replanned into eight days and, as a result, the time allocated to
rnobiPV was greatly reduced. In sight of this reduction it was decided to test only the alternate conﬁguration.

The smartphones were both fully charged a day prior in order to have a prime and backup phone in case one was
required. Both phones are identical such that crew could chose to use either and quickly switch from one to the other
in case of need.

On the day of execution, the phone ﬁt snugly into the 3D printed cuff worn mount. It took, however, some
manoeuvring to set up the cables, as we had anticipated and Mogensen had trained for, and link the peripherals to

‘8 the smartphone. He connected the wired audio headset to the audio adapter cable jacks and inserted the adapter cable
$3 to the smartphone. The head mounted webcam was connected Via USB to the smartphone and all the cabling was
é secured with a velcro strap to the crew arm to keep it out of the way.
«5
E» Afterwards, Mogensen activated the smartphone, veriﬁed battery levels were above 80%, connected to the
Sf appropriate network on the Node 2 Wireless Access Point, and started the rnobiPV software. The ODF library
<2 loaded automatically and the full rnobiPV connection to ground worked ﬂawlessly at the ﬁrst attempt. He then
:9 powered up the iPad and navigated on the Safari browser to the IP address that would link it automatically to the
§ rnobiPV software on the smartphone.
5f Mogensen set the smartphone as master, disabled the speech recognition for the ﬁrst part of the test and loaded a
E designated procedure as per the test sequence. On the ground terminal everything operated nominally: our system
§ instantly recognized the master instance, conﬁgured itself as slave and mirrored the newly opened procedure on our
3“ laptop screen at EAC, which was screencast to Col-CC in real time (Figure 6). Mogensen pressed next and previous
1;) on the onscreen display to scroll forward and backward through the procedure and the ground terminal synchronlzed
a the green step rnarker as expected. Crew also veriﬁed that the iPad synchronized.
O
m —...... . An I :3“... 12* : ""L‘.’ _ ‘
E :— . ‘ i 4 tab '45:“
Z q . :4“. “Pi ’) ‘M’ n...- _
8 _ ° ' r ' “S a 4‘8‘ ‘3 t , r“
e E V ‘ ' 2‘7 ~ 'i P- m
< a . ‘ _ > r ‘ ~
(D5 3 \' 3 » .AQ: i'IW-Iai‘ 9"",""
g g » ’ Ct , _ 77‘. 7“ E - ~
m ‘ . \€_ __ ’ ~ :.
E : ,~ V: _:,_.,-
2 I x \x.‘ \
m D 1, l ' .\
g = 1 § l
E g ""A— - i ""F""
8 TV ' 1
a = * «~
.2 ? ""' A
E / 0“ﬁ‘ A '5.
m , .

~ 7%; ""“‘ ‘_. 'w 53: ‘

. r ‘ _. “ ‘31: J f :1: Z ,
H I ' . ‘5 )f—ﬁv’ ?'i , > fat:
\\ ’_ lip"" 3%,ﬂ( ‘1 .‘\ ‘I Viz,
(t - L X9 \{x ’ i
Figure 6. Live space to ground mobiPV operations. Ground terminal and [SS devices synchronized (ESA).
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","Mogensen then enabled the speech recognition and tested the I '1"" , .. ./’ 5L L.‘ a
voice commanding. This test unfortunately failed due to issues QT"" y l “i
with the wired audio headset that was handed down from a '. '_ 2:. V; O , “\
previous 188 experiment. The ground quickly instructed the crew ‘ . ‘ "" 51 ,1 :- wv ‘J. (a I
to move on and speech recognition was disabled once more. The f ' ‘5 ~ . ,
cause of the headset failure was traced back to the strict order that - z,’ a i
must be followed while connecting peripherals t0 the smartphone. ‘ - ""it i ' ”a“ ‘
Crew and ground sent successful text notes and image notes “ / (72/.x/ ‘
(Figure 7) and Video notes back and forth. Of course, because of . i: I a ($5
the abovementioned audio issue, the crew Video note was without - {‘1' .
audio and we had to skip the recording of audio notes on the crew \ “ x
deVice. A real time two-way Video link was also established ‘u \_ ‘.._
between space and ground and crew were able to View the ﬂight ‘ '
o controllers and Vice versa with fairly good quality. Figure 7- Image note. “ASWOWW Eye View”
El from the head—worn webcam (ESA).
E The ﬁrst test concluded at this point as planned and the crew reconﬁgured the iPad back to nominal station
g conﬁguration while the ground downloaded the log ﬁles and disengaged the Video link.
3"" Bearing in mind that the ﬂight segment consisted of a new device, connected to the onboard wiﬁ, routed to the
<2 ground Via the TDRS satellites and that the ground segment consisted of the initial receiving dish in Whitesands,
:9 POIC in Huntsville, the MCC at Houston, the Col-CC in Munich and ﬁnally the ground terminal at EAC in
g Cologne, with return links, this was very impressive.
if A second rnobiPV test is planned for 2016 to check out the prime conﬁguration using Google Glass.
3
g V. Results
1;» I. Comparison of NEEMO 19 and 20 Operations
5 The software versions had developed considerably between NEEMO l9 and 20. NEEMO crew members had a
Eu: direct network connection and found the collaborative tool between aquanauts and CAPCOM to be useful with a
; smooth continuous Video both ways. Crew gave feedback in NEEMO 19 which was incorporated into the NEEMO
(:3 20 version. This was well received, improving the network and testing out the multi user communication system.
0
(3:5 The rnobiPV versions utilized in NEEMO l9 and NEEMO 20 were different development sequences and the
E next generation to be used in NEEMO 21 follows on from the NEEMO 19 model, while the 188 model is an exact
a copy of the rnobiPV hardware and software used in NEEMO 20.
o
:5: J . Comparison of NEEMO and [88 Operations
E NEEMO and 188 operations have the obvious difference of microgravity during operations which changes the
g cable management approach. The communications network in NEEMO is much more straightforward than space to
3 ground so the Video and high bandwidth connections are more ﬂuid and easier to manage. Safety constraints meant
E removing internal batteries from the Google Glass which introduced a large NASA approved external battery with
5 two connection cables, an activity to charge this and the need for a belt to mount it during use. In NEEMO this is
simply a wireless operation and wearable unit.
K. Crew Feedback
NEEMO 19 was extremely useful for Andreas Mogensen as he was able to extensively use rnobiPV prior to his
188 mission. This experience combined with two hardware inclusive simulations and training at EAC prepared him
very well for the cn-board usage.
Crew has stated that they would like more wireless technology, for example to substitute the wired earpiece with
a wireless Bluetooth earpiece and to ﬁnd a n0n-cabled solution to the ISS requirements of the large external battery,
a downside of having to modify a ncn-space qualiﬁed COTS deVice.
Overall 188 crew gave the feedback that they were very well supported by ground teams and the training was
excellent, particularly as they used rnobiPV twice, also during NEEMO l9.
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","Crew would like to see the InobiPV smartphone as a crew preference device that they can pick up in standalone
mode at anytime and use instead of a laptop or the iPad for any activity. In principle, this is already possible with the
hardware and software available on-board.

L. Flight Controller Feedback

The ability to see exactly which step the crew was working on, synchronized in real time, was highly appreciated
by ﬂight controllers. The two-way Video was not found to be useful in the ﬁrst operational test due to occasional
unpredictable network performance with regard to bandwidth. All the messaging features worked extremely well.

VI. Conclusion

The ﬁrst version of InobiPV was tested on NEEMO 19 in 2014, a different version was utilized on NEEMO 20

in 2015 followed in the same year by that identical version being demonstrated in space on the 188. The ﬁnal on-
§ board demonstration is scheduled in early 2017. All in all InobiPV has been used by ESA astronaut Luca Parmitano,
E NASA astronauts Serena Aunon and Dave Coan, JAXA astronaut Norishige Kanai, ESA astronaut Andreas
8, Mogensen and BSA astronaut Timothy Peake spanning NEEMO 19 to 18$ Increment 47. NASA astronaut Kate
E Rubins and JAXA astronaut Takuya Onishi have been trained for Increment 48. Crew have expressed a strong
E interest in future development and integration of the mobile procedure Viewer into crew operations onboard the
g International Space Station.
Q
95” InobiPV has been shown to improve astronaut efﬁciency and greatly reduce the time lost suspending an activity
§ to consult laptop/tablet/paper instructions at each step in the procedure. The system also eliminates ground
g guesswork of what step the crew is currently working on.
g
E The advantages of using COTS devices has resulted in simplifying the qualiﬁcation of mobiPV for a more agile
é technology deployment, proving to be both cost effective and functional. Increasing TRL levels of other COTS
g“ hardware would lead to wider options and even better performance for future hardware conﬁgurations.
3
g In July 2016 the second generation of InobiPV from NEEMO 19 will be ﬁeld tested underwater by the NEEMO
g 21 crew.
E
‘2 Future everyday utilization of InobiPV includes making the phone available as a standalone tool so that it can
35 potentially be picked up anytime as a crew preference, in the same way the iPad is currently utilized, as an
% alternative to a ﬁxed laptop to View procedures. The next generation of InobiPV might include a barcode reader for
g faster stowage operations as well as a multi-eollaboration tool so that more complex scenarios can be planned on the
E 188: it can be used by multiple astronauts at the same time as well as multi-user ground terminals for the ﬂight
E controllers and payload specialist to interact directly, efﬁciently and effectively with the crew optimizing systems
2 and payload utilization time.
E
'8
2?:
Q

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","Acknowledgments
The authors Wish to thank all the participating team members from the industrial teams: Space Applications
Services bV (prime contractor) and Skytek Ltd. (sub-Contractor): Keshav Chintamani, Boris Van Lierde, Luka
Hranjee, Francesco Nuzzolo, Mauro Rieei, Paul Kiernan, Karl Chadwick, Martin Vaehovski, Shane Maloney.
References
i Chintamani, K., and Van Lierde, B., and Maloney, S., and Kiernan, P., and Martinez Oliveira, D., and Wolff, M., “Wearable
crew support technology on the International Space Station: the mobile Procedure Viewer (m0biPV)” 5 7th International Annual
Meeting 0fthe Human F actors and Ergonomics Society, San Diego, 2013
H De Weerdt, D., and Ilkovitz, M., and Ambrus, R., and Nevatia, Y., and Martinez Oliviera, D., and Arguello, L., “WEAR:
g WEarable Augmented Reality” 11th International Workshop on Simulation & E GSE facilities far Space Programmes, Noordwijk,
3 Netherlands: European Space Agency, 2010
S
(x!
§ “1 Matevska, J., and SieVi, S., and Gries, F., and Wolff, M., and Melody, J., “CRUISE — Evaluating Enhanced Crew
if Autonomy Concepts On-Board the 188 as a Preparation for Future Long Term Crewed Space Missions,” 18th Data Systems In
g Aerospace Conference, Warsaw, 2014
5
g) 1V Fortunato, A., and Wolff, M., and Boyd, A., and Martinez Oliveira, D., “mobiPV: an innovative mobile procedure Viewer
g for the International Space Station” 66th International Astronautical Congress, Jerusalem, 2015
E
E
E
g“
2
3
S
m
m
E
%
0
Lu
o
<:
9-1
(A
Z
o
m
E
Q
<:
m
<:
Z
5‘
'0
g
L3
Q
B
O
Q
10
American Institute Of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
