"","x"
"1","STATUS: IN PROCESS 20140311 OCLC #: 21815003
REQUEST DATE: 20140311 NEED BEFORE: 20140321 SOURCE: ND
*1 14627980*

BORROWER: NAJ RECEIVE DATE: DUE DATE:
RENEWAL REQ: NEW DUE DATE: SPCL MES:
LENDERS: USU, *MWF, ZAP

LHR SUMMARY: 3—(1990—)

TITLE: Microgravity science and technology.

ISSN: 0938-0108

IMPRINT: Munich, West Germany : C. Hanser, c1990—

ARTICLE TITLE: Space sickness on earth

ARTICLE AUTHOR: NOOij, S.A.E.; BOS, J.E.

VOLUME: 19

ISSUE DATE: 2007

PAGES: 113-117

VERIFIED: WORLDCAT

SHIP TO: NASA JSC — STI Center/ZlOl NASA Parkway/Mailcode I823, Bldg 30A, Rm 1077/Houston TX

US

77058-3696

BILL TO: NASA JSC - STI Center/2101 NASA Parkway/Mailcode 1823, Bldg 30A, Rm 1077/Houston TX

US...

SHIP VIA: Email/Fax/First Class Mail

MAXCOST: 15.00

COPYRIGHT COMPLIANCE: CCL

BILLING NOTES: Require patron name, ILL#, and/or copy of request with invoices. NTIS Acct#

7538...

FAX: 281-244—6624

EMAIL: jsc-sticnter@mail.nasa.gov

AFFILIATION: AMIGOS, CCC, LVIS, LHL

BORROWING NOTES: NTIS Acct# 75385-5, Linda Hall Acct #D10511

PATRON: Perkins, Nekisha

"
"2","REDSTONE SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION CENTER
INTERLIBRARY LOANS
In case of errors with this ARIEIJFAX/PDF transmission, please let us know within two
(2) workmg days. Thank you.
IL Request # __________
0 Text blurred '
0 Missing pages_________
0 Unreadable
F air-Use and Copyright
Warning Concerning Copyright Restrictions
"" The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United States Code) governs the
making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.
Under certain conditions speciﬁed in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to
furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One speciﬁed condition is that the
photocopy or reproduction is not to be ""used for any purpose other than private
study, Scholarship} or research."" If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a
photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of ""fair use."" that user may be '
liable for copyright infringement.
Please read the terms and conditions for items sent by e-mail or An'el.
This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in
its judgement, fulﬁllment of the order would involve violation of the
copyright law. .
Terms and Conditions for items sent by e-mail or Ariel
_ The contents of the attached document may be copyrighted. If the document it
protected by copyright law, the following restrictions apply.
oYou may print only one paper copy, from which you may not make further copies,
except as may be allowed by law. '
oYou may not retain the electronic copy after printing out a paper copy.
oYou may not make further electronic copies or convert the ﬁle into any other
format.
oYou may not cut and paste or otherwise alte’r the text.
«You may forward the document to the end user in order for them to prlnt the .
single copy, but you may not save or print the document before forwarding.
Voice: 256 876-0945 _
Fax: 256 842-8453
ARIEL: 199.209.144.100 _

"
"3","Suzanne A.E. Nooij, Jelte E. Bos, Eric L. Groen, Willem Bles and Wubbo J . Ockels: Space Sickness on Earth
i S.A.E. Nooij, J.E. 303, EL. Groen, W. Bles and W J. Ockels
Z Space Sickness on Earth
|
i "" '_' "" t ' ' . ' ' ' . , ' . _ ‘ ' ﬂ Introduction
i Durmg Ihefuef tiaye m Space, 1.. e., after er n'ensmenjrem fir re
ﬂ I II I 1 1- a I a I
~; OhG’ guere 1:12;"" 5m}; quheﬁ‘ﬂm— (2:; eﬁmeneum} ‘Fll-HEE1-‘gﬁféi It is well known that the transitlon 1nt0 mlcrograwty can be
1 tie PHCE ”pm""??? J”! mm“? { J; 38 .sympmme ﬂj “ accompanied by eympteme ef the Space Adaptation Syndrome
. sze ”Hymn end dizzmeei ere espeemﬂy prnveked by head (8A3). Rﬂughly 5U% nf all Space travellers suffer {rem nausea,
I govememg. AStmmutS hire m:ntzoned Close szmzlarztlee dizziness? dieerienlatien andfer Visual metiee illusions during
.. Wee"" f 9 Symptoms Of f9 S a"" ”“3 WW?” ”“9’ “Pen"" the ﬁrst 2—3 days ef the ﬂight [1, 2]. Allheugh SAS can be eenp
i eneed riffIE?!‘ e I hem“ eenrrrﬁtge run en Earth, 3.3., after t: fren- sidered a form of motion sickness (i e the symptoms are
: ‘wnﬂngﬁﬂﬁ 36 m I G ‘Mﬂmmd by Sliik‘iiefﬁ Iedueer! by induced by metien) ineueeeptibility te Earthly metien eiekneee
. Cenfrghrgemen, SIC). Durmg severef space mmemne, we referred deee net gu ar ant e e that the astronaut will 3130 be free from SAS
f Susceprtbﬂify m SAS and re .S'IC in H eerreneure endfmmd 4 ef during his ﬂight [31 4]. European eeientiet aetrenauts ef the DI
. them Ewing .ruseeprfhfe re bath SIC and SAS, and F being Her Spaeelab Mission mentioned eleae similarities between the
sneeeprfhfe :0 SEC He.“ he SAS. This eerreependenee in enseepti- eymptems they experieneed after a 36 centrifuge run and these
__. bfh‘ry Suggests mm SIC and SAS ehere the Same under'iymg 0f SAS [5]. That is a transition frem 3 10 1G elieited the same
! meehenfsm. Tefm'rher ertmﬁr riﬂe mechanism, .eevemf vestibm’er e ffe cts as a transition from 1 to 0G As in S AS symptoms were
parameters have heen investigated {e.g. pasture! smbim}; preveked by head mevemente and could last fer several heure
l veenbuferﬁv driven eye mevemenrs, eubfeenve verrieef}. We after e entri f u gati en. Importantly, the aetrenaute’ susceptibility
-' fermd .reme striking ehrmgee in mdfw'duef eaeee the: are peeet— tn SIC eerreepended to their susceptibility te SAS which hints
-. bf}: due re the eenrrg'ﬁtge run. However; the variebifigr beheeen at similar (er possibly even equal} underlying mechanisms This
I SHWEGM gﬁfierﬂﬂv :29 very Ierge. making phyetefngiﬂﬂf Fink!“ 55' observatieh Wee the base ef a series erf experiments investigah
L SIC 4""d.5{§5_3“” ?‘ardmﬁnd -_ . _. _. _ .. __ _ - ing the similarities between SIC and SAS and their possible
' causes. This article summarises the main results of these exper-
! iments, with a focus on the contribution of three Soyuz
: Missions.
' Authors The ﬁrst objective of these experiments. was to validate the
hypothesis that individual susceptibilitiee te SIC and SAS are
S.A.E. Nooij, J .E. Bos, E.L. Groen,W.B1es correlated. Initially the participating astronauts (n=8) were
TNO Human Factors, Kampweg 5, 3769 DE Soesterberg, The Netherlands involved in Spacelab and MIR missions as long as 16 years ago_
2 W]. Ockels We have extended the number of subjects by means of the
I First Dutch astronaut from the Eurepean Space Ageney, currently prefeeenr ef recent DELTA, ENEIDE, and 118 missions (n=3).
Aerospace for Sustainable Engineering and Teehnnlegy at Delft Unirereity ef The second objective was to gain insight ill the meeheniem
' Technology and at the Institute of Enemy and Environment ef the University (1 1 . SIC d S AS Th .
. = . the veetlhular a stern la ed a
of Gromngen. 1111 et‘ ylng _an at 3' p_ F
' cruelal role hereln was ahead elear ﬁ‘em the DI —ex _ enmenle,
_ Y P
-— —— where we observed changes in linear motion perception, in the
.._ coneSpondencc perception of verticality and postural stability after centrifuga-
S.A.E. Nooij tion. Further evidence for a vestibular cause came from experi-
TNO Hurznan 133$!st S h th 1 d ments on eye movements [6]. A range of tests were carried out,
P.O.B0x 3 , 37 Z oesterberg,T eNe er an s - _ - -
Phone: +31 3 46 356 326, Fax: +31 3 46 353 977 both 111 astronaut and 11-011 astronaut subjects, focusmg on
email: suzame_nooij@mo,n1 changes 1n vestlbularly drlven processes that would reﬂect the
© Z-Tec Publishing, Bremen Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-S/6 (2007) 113

"
"4","Suzanne A.E. Nooij, Jelte E. Bos, Eric L. Groen, Willem Bles and Wubbo J . Ockels: Space Sickness on Earth
state of the adaptation to an altered gravity level. In the next ses— and visual origin) is required to transpose the acceleration infor-
sion we will ﬁrst brieﬂy touch upon the theoretical background mation into Earth coordinates before low-pass ﬁltering can be
of these experiments. Subsequently, the methods and results applied. The time constant of this ﬁltering seems to be opti-
will be summarised and we will discuss the implications for mized for natural body motions. For unnatural motions the
future research. delay induced by this ﬁltering causes a difference between the
expected vertical and the vertical based on actual sensory input.
Theory This difference results in motion sickness.
It may furthermore be assumed that a persisting conﬂict trig— '
Generally, self—propelled motion in a natural environment does gers our CNS to reorganize its internal model (or recalculate its
not make people sick. Artiﬁcial conditions typically do, like parameters), in order to reduce this conﬂict. This is also expect-
those caused by (transportation in) vehicles on the ground, in ed to occur during adaptation to microgravity, where the astro-
the air, at sea, and in space. A deﬁnite ﬁnding, known already naut must adapt to an altered sensory response pattern, since
for over 100 years, concerns the fact that people without func- head tilt is no longer accompanied by otolith stimulation.
tioning organs of balance in the inner ears (labyrinthine defec— Hence, this framework creates a link between motion sick-
tives, LD), never get sick from motion [7, 8, 9]. Another obser— ness and related adaptation phenomena on the one hand, and
vation concerns the fact that people who do control their motion actual body motion and attitude (i.e. postural stability), motion
themselves (like car drivers and pilots) usually do not get sick, perception, and eye movements, on the other hand. As a conse-
whereas passive passengers do [10, 11]. Partly based on such quence we measured speciﬁcally these responses in our subjects
observations, Reason & Brand [9] postulated the most cited before and after centrifugation.
conﬂict theory on motion sickness. In brief, this states that
motion sickness occurs when inputs from the vestibular system, Methods
other proprioceptors, and Vision are at variance with stored
motion patterns or “expectation”. Though very successful in Centrzﬁigatz'on
explaining many observations, this theory also had some ﬂaws. Centrifugation took place at the Center for Man in Aviation,
This led Bles et a1. [12] to recognize the special role of gravity Soesterberg, The Netherlands. The centrifuge has a free swing-
in motion sickness, by focusing on the observation that people ing gondola at the end of a 4 m long arm, resulting in a constant
only get sick when there is an (apparent) change of gravity with alignment of the gravito-inertial force with the gondola. To min-
respect to their head. They called this the subjective vertical imize cardiovascular and pulmonary stress during centrifuga-
mz'smatch theory. As ﬁrst proposed by Oman [13], the ‘expeota- tion, the subj ect was put in a supine position (feet pointing in the
tion’ component was accounted for by using an observer model direction of motion), so that the G-load was along the subject’s
or ‘internal model’ [14, 15]. In short, this model describes the x-axis. Electrocardiogram was continuously monitored during
control of body motion and attitude. Instead of using sensor out— the entire centrifuge run for safety reasons. In order to minimize
put for feedback control directly, a prediction thereof is used nauseogenic tumbling sensations during acceleration and deoel- =
based on acquired knowledge of body and sensor dynamics (the eration, the G-load was changed with a moderate 0.1G/s until
internal model). It is assumed that self motion and attitude per- the level of 3G was reached. In the ﬁrst experiments, the 3G
ception, as well as eye movements are also deriVed from this exposure lasted 90 minutes, later this was reduced to 60 min-
sarne internal model. According to the subjective vertical mis- utes.
match theory the difference between sensory and internal model
signals coding for verticality are correlated with motion sick— Assessing SIC and SAS susceptibility
ness. Since symptoms of SIC and SAS are mainly provoked by head
An essential issue in this concept is the (neural) estimation of movements, this was taken as a provocative stimulus to deter-
gravity, the vertical. Because gravitational and inertial accelera- mine whether subjects suffered from SIC following centriﬁiga—
tions are physically indistinguishable, our central nervous sys— tion. Astronauts were to complete a questionnaire that addressed
tem (CNS) has to ﬁnd a way to separate the two. If our CNS motion perception (self motion illusions or illusionary motion
would not recognize the difference and would, for example, of the surround) as the consequence of body movements in gen-
interpret the acceleration due to gravity as upward motion with eral, and head movements in particular. They were to make ten
an acceleration of g = 9.8 m/sz, we would have traveled over a self—paced head movements about the yaw, pitch and roll axes (f
distance of 440 km within ﬁve minutes. Obviously this is not 3 0.25 Hz., A 3 i400). After each of these stimuli they described
the case, and apparently our CNS is capable of distinguishing their motion perception and rated any experienced discomfort
between inertial and gravitational accelerations. Probably our according to an 11-point scale (denoted by Misery Scale or
CNS uses low-pass ﬁltering to get rid of the gravitational accel— MISC). This scale rates different levels of motion sickness with '
eration, because gravity is constant [16]. However, gravity is 0 = “no symptoms’, 5 = “nauseated” and 10 = “vomiting”.
constant in an Earth—ﬁxed frame of reference, whereas the neu- These head movements were performed both standing and in a
ral information comes from sensors in a head-ﬁxed frame of ref— supine position. During the ﬂight, the astronauts completed this
erence (otoliths). Hence, angular information (from vestibular questionnaire daily from L-2 to R+7. In space, astronauts were
114 Microgravity soi. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007)

"
"5",""" Suzanne A.E. Nooij, Jelte E. Bos, Eric L. Groen, Willem Bles and Wubbo J . Ockels: Space Sickness on Earth
-_ explicitly instructed to stop when the movements hampered Head movements
their functional performance. An astronaut was considered to be After the centrifuge run pitch and roll movements were
_ susceptible to SAS or SIC when the MISC scores were 5 or provocative when erect, whereas yaw and pitch movements
higher. In the ﬁrst set of experiments (Spacelab and MIR mis- were provocative in a supine position. This indicates that only
'5 sions, 11:8) the procedures were slightly different (see [17]). those head movements are provocative that change the orienta-
: The main difference was the absence of controlled head move— tion of the head relative to gravity. Movements about an axis
.- ment protocol in ﬂight. These astronauts rated their SAS sus- parallel with gravity were not provocative. Susceptible subjects
- ceptibility based on recollection of their experiences in ﬂight. made slower head movements after centrifugation than before
SIC susceptibility only was furthermore assessed in 67 non- [22]. So far, three astronauts completed the head movement pro-
astronaut subjects, using similar head movement protocols. tocol in space. One of them rated all three head motions equal-
"" 1y provocative, one found yaw less provocative than pitch and
i Vestibular tests roll and a third astronaut rated all head movements as ‘not
Next to the head movement protocol, subj ects performed sever- provocative’.
. a1 vestibular function tests. Per experiment, we used different
I! tests and different subject groups. PosturaZ stability was PosturaI stability
i assessed by stabilometry in a tilting room in ﬁve astronauts and Postural stability was greatly affected in most subjects after the
' eight non-astronaut subjects. The subject stood, through a hole centrifuge run, although no correlation between postural stabil-
in the cabin ﬂoor, on a layer of foam rubber on top of the earth ity and SIC was found. Subjects had difﬁculty with taking cor-
; ﬁxed platform [18]. The room could move about a roll axis, ners or walking in a straight line. With the eyes closed, subjects
5 located at ankle height. With the room stationary, the centre of generally showed a tendency to fall backwards [23]. Normally,
1 pressure was recorded while standing with eyes open, with eyes when the tilting—room is moving at low frequencies, subjects
closed, and with head extended in the neck. Subsequently, show postural sway at the same frequency as the visual sur-
recordings were made with the room moving at 0.125 Hz and round. At higher frequencies, sway decreases. In some astro-
0.2 Hz to angles of i 5°, both in roll and in pitch. Perception of nauts this pattern was altered after centrifugation. One particu-
body orientation relative to gravity was assessed in the TNO tilt lar astronaut showed extreme visual dependency after centrifu-
‘ chair in three astronauts and 12 non-astronaut subjects. Subjects gation and showed increased postural sway even at the highest
were orientated in various pitch body positions and had to indi- frequencies. Interestingly, similar results were obtained after
cate their longitudinal body axis and their subjective vertical space ﬂight [18]. However, such an extreme change to Visual
. with a joystick. Regarding eye movements, we looked at the dominance was not observed in other subjects.
plane that normally encompasses all eye rotation axes, the so
called Listing’s Plane (LP). The pitch orientation of LP is Perception ofbody orientation
dependent on head orientation relative to gravity and, thus, on In general, the indication of verticality under different angles of
otolith input [19, 20]. Eye movements were recorded with body tilt did not seem to be affected by centrifugation, neither
video-oculography (Eye Tracker, Chronos Vision, Berlin) in were changes observed in the indication of the subjective longi-
three astronauts and 12 non-astronaut subjects. With the head tudinal body axis. It was surprising though, that one astronaut
: ﬁxated by means of a bite board, subjects looked at various tar- showed very large deviations from the actual body axis in all
gets presented at a distance of 1.1 m within a ﬁeld of view of test sessions. This subject appeared to be susceptible to SIC.
i20°. To construct the LP, eye position data was converted into Unfortunately, it is not known whether this is also apparent in
rotation vectors [21]. The pitch orientation of the LP was other susceptible subjects.
deﬁned as the angle between the LP and the z-axis.
All tests were performed before and repeatedly after the cen- Orientation ofListings Plane
trifuge run (+0h, +2h, +4h). Preliminary results showed that the change in the orientation of
LP following centrifugation when compared to the pretest ori-
Results entation ranged from —1 .2 to +3.20 (mean difference=+0.8°). In
eight of the 15 subjects LP tilted forward, in four subjects a
SIC and SAS susceptibility backward tilt was found and in three subjects the orientation
In total, we have now assessed SIC and SAS susceptibility for was unaffected. So far, no clear relationship between SIC—sus-
11 astro- and cosmonauts. Four of them (36%) suffered from ceptibility and LP tilt was found.
SAS during their ﬂight and also experienced symptoms of SIC
,_ after the centrifuge run on Earth. The other seven were unsus- Conclusions
ceptible t0 SAS and t0 SIC. Of the 67 non-astronaut subjects
who participated in a centrifuge run, 31 were considered SIC- The main objective of this research was to investigate whether
susceptible. Taken together with the astronauts, this results in an susceptibility to SAS (in space ﬂight) and to SIC (after cen—
incidence of 45%. trifugation on Earth) are correlated. The three Soyuz missions
_. Microgravity sci. technol. XIX-5/6 (2007) 115

"
"6","Suzanne A.E. Nooij, J elte E. Bos, Eric L. Groen, Willem Bles and Wubbo J . Ockels: Space Sickness on Earth
reported on here offered us the possibility to extend our pool of why is one astronaut susceptible to sickness induced by gravity
subjects to a total of 11. The positive correlation between SIC transitions while the other is not. Nevertheless, on a more con-
and SAS susceptibility found in previous studies is maintained: ceptual level we do understand why sickness occurs in the ﬁrst
all astronauts studied so far suffering from SAS also experi- place. Although the absence of gravity is, of course, a special
enced SIC, whereas all astronauts unsusceptible to SAS did not case, the transition from 1 to 0G and the transition from 3 to 1
experience SIC. Furthermore, the overall incidence of SIC G have in common that the body is mal—adapted to the “novel”
(45% of a total of 78 subjects) is comparable to that of SAS as gravitational environment. During prolonged centrifugation, the
reported in the literature [1, 2]. These ﬁndings substantiate the body eventually adapts to the hypergravity environment, and is
evidence for the hypothesis that SIC and SAS share the same thus maladapted for the lG-environment when coming out of
underlying mechanism. . the centrifuge. This mal-adaptation results in an inadequate esti-
The use of an inﬂight head movement protocol was a major mation of the body state, which may result in motion sickness,
methodological improvement compared to the Spacelab and together with inappropriate sensory-motor responses, like pos-
MIR missions. It is the ﬁrst time that both SIC and SAS could tural over—corrections. A similar. state of mal-adaptation occurs
be rated using the same protocol, enabling a more detailed upon entry in weightlessness (and upon return to Earth).
objective comparison. Apart from using long duration centrifugation as a research
The essential role of gravity in SIC is illustrated by the ﬁnd- paradigm to investigate the physiological processes involved in
ing that after centrifugation all head movements were provoca- SIC and SAS, it may also have practical implications. It is still
tive, except for those about an axis parallel with gravity (yaw unknown whether repeated exposures to G-level transitions lead
when erect, roll when supine). This makes sense, since the esti- to decreased susceptibility, as is observed in many motion sick-
mation of gravity relative to the head is especially challenged in ness causing stimuli (e.g. [25, 26]). If so, this would suggest that
these situations, leading to a conﬂict between the sensed and astronauts can be trained to c0pe with the G—transitions that
expected vertical. It may be not surprising that in microgravity, occur during the mission (i.e. launch and landing, during inter-
where gravity is absent and the whole expectation pattern has to mittent artiﬁcial gravity on board the 188 or a transition to plan-
be updated, yaw movements were also considered provocative. ets gravity). Further research is required to investigate whether
Interestingly, one astronaut rated the yaw-provocation still less training has a positive effect on the symptomatology of SIC and
than that of pitch and roll, which could be attributed to the pres- whether this effect transfers to space ﬂight. Lastly, long dura- '
ence of visual structures indicating ‘Verticality’ in ISS. tion centrifugation can be used in testing the usefulness of anti-
Manipulation of body position relative to the visual surrounding Space Sickness drugs.
would verify this hypothesis. .
As anticipated by the theoretical framework and the role of Acknowledgements
gravity therein, posture, eye movements, and self motion and
attitude perception, could be altered by centrifugation too. Our The authors would like to thank astronauts, cosmonauts and
experimental results clearly show a deterioration of postural other subjects for their participation in the experiments. The
balance following centrifugation, which is also observed after staff of the Centre for Man in Aviation is greatly acknowledged
spaceﬂight. This suggests a disturbed estimation of the actual for their support in the centrifuge studies. The studies could not
body state, especially when visual input is absent. On the other have been carried out without the organizational support from
hand, in static situations the perception of the body state seems BSA and ﬁnancial support from the Space Research
not to be greatly affected, as shown by our results on the per- Organization Netherlands.
ception of body orientation. It should however be noted that,
apart from the vestibular system, the somatosensory system also References
contributes to attitude perception, likely confounding our
results. This system is not yet incorporated in our model. In this 1- Homfck. J L--‘ Space Motion SiCKHCSS- Acta Astronautica VOL 25, I)-
respect veStlbulFu-ly .drlven eye movements were expected to 2. Ejtinieipfé g.gzggovlevka. I K, Tarasov, I K, Alekseev, VN.. Kornoiova,
prov1de more direct 1nformat10n about pos51ble changes 1n the L N., Marge“ A D., Gorm'ladze, G 1“. Space Motion Sickness:
VCStibUIaI SYStem. Although we did Observe 3. change in the 01‘i* Phenomenology, countermeasures, and mechanisms. Aviat. Space
entation of LP after prolonged centrifugation, results are yet EnvirOD-Med-V01543P- 312-317(1933)
insufﬁcient to draw ﬁrm conclusions. However, we are working 3' Oman,CM., high’enée’gﬁ K"" Money K E"" MCCOJ” R K"" , .
. M.I.T./Canad1an vestibular experiments on the Spacelab—l [I’llSSlOIlZ 4.
on a COI‘ﬂpﬂl‘lSOﬂ between our reSUItS and those 0f Clarke and Space motion sickness: symptoms, stimuli, and predictability. Exp. Brain
colleagues [24], who measured the behavior of LP during space- Reg, vol. 64, p, 316-334 (1986)
ﬂight in the same astronauts, 4. HomickJ L., Reschke M E. Vanderploeg J M., in Results of the Life .
Although. the vestibular tests altogether revealed some inter— ﬁigf‘gagig; (ﬁnggﬁiﬁoﬁrhﬁﬁgsgﬁe(1133131)}149081163'tﬁrng0
estlng 1nd1v1dual changes, the results do not yet prov1de clear Texas, p. 153-158 (1987)
insight into the physiological processes involved ill SIC. This 5. Ockels WJ., Furrer R., Messerschmid E.: Simulation of space adaptation
also relates to the still unanswered question of susceptibility:
l 16 Microgravity sci. technol. XIX—5/6 (2007)

"
"7","! Suzanne A.E. Nooij, Jelte E. Bos, Eric L. Groen, Willem Bles and Wubbo J . Ockels: Space Sickness on Earth
1"" syndrome on earth. Exp. Brain Res. v01. 79, p. 661-663 (1990).
E 6. Groen, E L.: Orientation to gravity. PhD Thesis, (1997)
1 7. Irwin, J A.: The pathology of seasickness. The Lancet v01. 2, p. 907-909
1 (188])
_ 8. James, W. The sense of dizziness in deaf—mutes. Am. J . Otology v01. 4,
1 p. 239—254 (1882)
1 9. Reason. J 7?, Brand, J J..- Motion sickness Academic Press, London, p.
| 83-101 (1975)
,1 10. Rolm'ck, A., Lubow, R E.: Why is the driver rarely motion sick? The role
1 of controllability in motion sickness. Ergonomics v01. 34, p. 867-879
! (1991)
: 11. Stanney, K M., Hash. P..' Locus of user—initiated control in virtual envi-
1 ronments: inﬂuences on cybersickness. Presence v01. 7, p. 447-459
1 (1998)
| 12. Bles, W., 308, JE., De Graaf 3., Groen, E L., Wertheim, A H..- Motion
sickness: only one provocative conﬂict? Brain Res. Bull. vol. 47, p. 481-
l 487 (1998).
1 13. Oman, C M: A heuristic mathematical model for the dynamics of senso-
- ry conﬂict and motion sickness. Acta Otolaryngol. Suppl. 392, p. 1-44
(1982).
14. 305, J E, Bles, W. Modelling motion sickness and subjective vertical
mismatch detailed for vertical motions. Brain Res. Bull. v01. 47, p. 537-
1 542 (1998)
I 15. 303, J E., Bles, W.. Theoretical considerations on canal-otolith interac-
tion and an observer model. Biol. Cybernetics vol. 86, p. 191-207
I (2002).
: 16. Mayne, R., in: H.H. Kornhuber (Ed), Handbook of sensory physiology.
1 1V—2 Vestibular system, Springer Verlag, Berlin, p. 493-580 (1974)
' 17. 3163, W., De Graajf B., Bos J E., Kroi, J R.: A sustained hypergravity
load as a tool to simulate space sickness. J . Gravit. Physiol. vol. 4, p. 1-4
(1997)
18. 3185, W., Van Ram], J.: Pre- and postﬂight (D-l) postUIal control in tilt-
' ing environments. Adv Oto-Rhino-Laryng. vol 42, p. 13-17 (1988)
19. Bockisch, C., Haslwanter; II: Three-dimensional eye position during stat-
ic roll and pitch in humans. Vision Res. vol. 21, p2127-2137 (2001)
_ 20. Furman, J M., Schor; R H.. Orientation of Listing's Plane during static
tilt in young and older human subjects. Vision Res. vol. 43, p. 67-76
(2003)
21. Hasiwanten 7?: Mathematics of thIee-dimensional eye rotations. Vision
Res. v01. 35, p1727-l739 (1995)
: 22. De Graaﬂ 3., De R00, J..' Effects of long duration centriﬁlgation 011 head
' movements and a psychomotor task. J. Vest. Res. v01. 6, p. 23-29 (1996)
23. 3138, W., De Graaﬁ B..' Postural consequences of long duration centrifu-
gation. J . Vest. Res. vol 3, p. 87-95 (1993)
1 24. CZarke, A,.' The collinearity between Listings's plane and the vestibular
system in mircogravity. Presented at the 15th 1AA Humans in Space
Symposium, Beneﬁts of Human Presence in Space, Graz, Austria (2005)
25. 303, J E., Bles, W., De Graaﬂ 3.: Eye movements to yaw, pitch, and roll
about vertical and horizontal axes: adaptation and motion sickness. Aviat.
Space Environ. Med. vol 73, p. 436-444 (2002).
26. Golding, J F, Start, J R R.: Effect of sickness severity 011 habituation to
repeated motion challenges in aircrew referred for airsickness treatment.
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. vol. 66, p. 625-630 (1995)
l
i
j Microgravity sci. techno]. XIX—5/6 (2007) 117
I

"
