"","x"
"1","Monitor activity, temperature and heart rate with a mouse telemeter to be used for animal
(1, research on board the international space station.
G. van Essen“), B.H.C.J. Masselingm, M.B. J ansenm, J. van Loon”)
(U Telemetronics Biometry BV, Costerweg 5, 6702 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands, E-mail:
<’ intogdjelemetronics.n]: Web http://www.te]emetronics.nl/
m Dutch Experiment Support Center, DESC@ ACTA-OCB, Vrije Universiteit, van derBoechorststraat 7, 1081 ET

0 Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Tel: +31(0)204448686. E—mail: z.vanloonga‘vunwﬂI Web www.desc.med.vu.nl.
<3 ""
<i> 1. ABSTRACT
a In-ﬂight animal research is necessary when we want to
. learn more about the role of gravity or the lack thereof U ’55 '53
0 during orbital ﬂights on the (human) body. In the '5! ‘5 ‘5

preparation for such experiments we developed STAR, U ‘5) mm"" A
0 Space Telemetry for Animal Research, a wireless and M wd'ﬁ'e Comm

battery-less mouse biometric telemeter capable of /
0 monitoring the heart rate, body temperature and animal Nmmm .tt'T'T'l‘

activity in grouped housed animals. The system is l ll—__'|
2) capable to monitor up to 20 animals simultaneously. "" ‘ *’
. \
i . . . Rmﬁ. Receiverrack
.a‘ To verify the application of the telemeter accelerometers, "" ’
g' by which activity is measured, we ﬂew a subset of the Fig. 1 Setup ofa STARsystem.
i telemeter system on board the International Space Station
(j. in the framework 0f the Dutch Soyuz MiSSiOH, DELTA Several animals (mice, rats) in which STAR is implanted,
’ that ﬂew in Apri12004. are housed together in a cage. This cage is placed on a
t. antenna unit (e.g. 45x45 cm) that contains both an
' Goals to be achieved during this mission were: inductive powering system and a receiving antenna. The
<.' - To test the accelerometers of STAR under microgravity inductive ﬁeld, generated by the powering system, serves
f conditions Wlth the same electrical circuit functions as the energy source for the implants. The antenna unit iS
° ' Get the electronic circuit space qualiﬁed. connected to a receiver rack. One or more receiver racks
' are connected to a (personal) computer via a TCP/IP
<' We showed that the accelerometers act similar on Earth network connection. This conﬁguration makes it possible
I as in ﬂight under microgravity COHdtti0hS~ Therefore, to place the receiver racks at the animal’s location and the
(g from this part Of the StUdy, we may conclude that the Computer ata remote location.
j accelerometers are suitable for use in the implant
‘1, currently under development. Recently, the ﬁrst in vivo Software, speciﬁcally designed for the STAR system,
E experiments showed reliable body temperature and heart stores the data. Data can be exported in CSV and native
é. rate data. EXCEL format for further processing with commercially
i available software packages. As the software is designed
2, In general we might conclude that the STAR-system iS to support TCP/IP, data can easily be made available via
i suitable to be implemented in animal research, both in internet. This makes remote monitoring possible.
i space and on ground.
i Each receiver rack can hold up to four receiver units. One
< 2- STAR DESIGN or more receiver units can be connected to an antenna
é unit to facilitate synchronous measurements on a number
(i) Prominent among the most frequently measured of animals. Via a TCP/IP network, several receiver racks
; physiological variables in animal research are (up to ﬁve) can be accessed simultaneously.
3 temperature, heart rate and activity. Major themes in
designing biometric implants are saving energy, Via the induction ﬁeld, an identiﬁcation code is
j miniaturization while gaining biologically realistic data. intermittently sent to a speciﬁc implant. Upon decoding
'3’ In developing STAR we tried to ﬁnd an optimal design this call, the implant responds by sending its implant
I that does justice to these themes. Fig. 1 shows a typical data. Each implant has a unique, 24 bit identiﬁcation
‘3' setup of the STAR system. code. Implants can be called in any desired sequence. The
§ period over which data will be measured and
(-
é,
!
f
‘. Journal of Gravitational Physiology 0 Vol 12(1) 0 2005 P-281

_

"
"2","subsequently sent to the receiver, can be set in the after anesthesia. For next experiments, the threshold <;
software. level for activity measurements will be programmed ‘
3 lower in the implant. The implant we used had a mass of «,2
1 2.4 grams and a volume of 2.5 m1. :
: .iﬂeats per minute . .7 I f ‘11?“qu “Fjgﬁu .5. , ' (é
*‘ﬁ‘m‘em.m gt-.. ' , . ,. _J;,-?§§>‘:-'f~"" i ,2’ <3
“WW ‘” ""“‘"" - ‘ J :1; 4t” ""l‘f}§__'!""f’.ii,j . . g
l- 3,"" ""g"". .‘ i (l
F ig. 2 Schematic representation of the intermittent transmission 1 ’ .. (l
. principle ' I S
. . . (_
. The intermittent character of the data transmission makes 1718- 3 The STAR ’mplam m ”5 cur r ent for m. i
it possible to monitor more than one animal . ‘ ' ‘3'
simultaneously with one receiver. Measurement data In geheral we might conclude that the Sy§tem ‘5 suitable .
i} from one animal will be followed by data from a second to be implemented in mouse research facﬂiues such as the ,
:s . . . . - - <1
, animal and so on. Many implants can be monitored in the ESA [house fac11’1ty for the 183’ M135, hUt may also be
same available radio channel. used in parabohc fllght or hypergrav1ty — centrifuge '
experiments and, in general, in on-ground animal ‘
Activity is measured by piézo electrical accelerometers,. research.
These accelerometers were tested in a special limited ‘3
. version of the STAR system. This version was designed Compared to other telemetry systems, STAR has some
i for experiments on board of the International Space clear advantages. The fact that no batteries ate used ti
i: Station in the framework of the Dutch Soyuz Mission, means. that the refurbishing problem does not eXtSt- The
i DELT A (2004). inductive powering can 1n prmc1ple prov1de the implant <2
with energy for many years.
| . .
g Output of the activity circuit is calculated as the number Moreover, being battery—less, volume and weight 0f <'
1‘ of times the acceleration signal amplitude exceeds 3 STAR eah be greatly reduced. compared to other
preset threshold level. A small threshold level means that telemetnc implants. The ﬁnal vetsmn 0f the implant W1“ ‘3'
small movements of the animal will already generate have a volume of1.0 ml and a we1ghtof1.5 gr.
i x sufﬁcient activity counter values. A high threshold level . . . . ‘
means that only fast accelerations will be recorded. If it is Most 1rnportant,.however, ‘5 that STAR makes 1t possxble .
1 expected that animals will be highly active, a prescaler to monitor sootally grouped animals. The intermittent 4
‘ can be switched on to reduce the activity movement character of data transmisswn means that many implants .
g 3 counts. can be monitored, also if only one radio channel is ‘
l available. Comparable telemetry systems that make use z
E: 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION of continuous transmission are severely limited in this (‘
i ' respect, since if one radio channel is available, only one ;.
i. The in—flight test entailed predeﬁned arm movements of implant ‘3‘?“ be “1.0mm? at the same lecation. This .
a the c osm on aut for a short p erio d of time in three makes soc1al behav10r studies almost 1mp0331ble. -
l
t ortho onal axes. It turned out that the accelerometers act . . . . i
ll ~ - g - - . . A ﬁnal ver310n of STAR Will be commermally available _
3 Similar on Earth as 1n-fhght under microgravny d th Ph s‘oL' Q tth d f2 00 6 i
1 conditions. Therefore, from this part of the study, we may un er e name y 1 in a e en 0 ' ‘;
l conclude that the accelerometers are suitable for use in an .
i . implant that is to be used for animal research in space. 4' ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS (-
l , . . . '
l. Recently, the ﬁrst in vivo experiments were carried out on Vt e would hke t9 than: BSA and thh: D utch ministry 0f .
mice and rats with a prototype system measuring Econormo Affags an Mthe Du“; Space Research
3 temperature and heart rate. The results show reliable data Orgahlzauon S lo$k ( GAGE}? orh supporting thls ‘
for those physiological variables. Activity monitoring act1v1ty. er WOUd istot ah D%UIEFFAspeCe / Luc van
was negligible due to the slow movements of the animal den Bergh or support urmgt e mlssmn. f
-; (1
3'
7‘ e
; P-282 Journal of Gravitational Physiology . V0112(1) . 2005 ‘
e I

"
