"","x"
"1","46th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2008-812
7 - 10 January 2008, Reno, Nevada
An OverVIew of The MicrograVIty Selence Glovebox (MSG)
Fac111ty, and the GraVIty-Dependent Phenomena Research
Performed in the MSG 0n the International Space Statlon
Reggie A. Spivey*
TeC-Masters Ina, Huntsville, Alabama, 35806
William A Sheredyi
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 44135
And
Ginger FloresiE
NASA Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, Alabama, 35812
The Microgravity Science GlovebOX (MSG) is a double rack facility aboard the International Space Station (188)
designed for gravity—dependent phenomena investigation handling. The MSG has been operating in the 188 US
Laboratory Module since July 2002. The MSG facility provides an enclosed working area for investigation
manipulation and observation. The MSG’s unique design provides two levels of containment to protect the ISS crew
from hazardous operations. Research investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter work
volume, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 watts of cooling
capability, Video and data recording and real time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, access to 188
Vacuum Exhaust and Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is
an ideal platform for research required to advance the technology readiness levels (TRL) needed for the Crew
Exploration Vehicle and the Exploration Initiative. Areas of research that Will benefit from investigations in the
MSG include thermal management, ﬂuid physics, spacecraft fire safety, materials science, combustion, reaction
control systems, in situ fabrication and repair, and advanced life support technologies. This paper Will provide a
detailed explanation of the MSG facility, a synopsis of the research that has already been accomplished in the MSG
and an overview of investigations planning to operate in the MSG. In addition, this paper Will address possible
Changes to the MSG utilization process that Will be brought about by the transition to 188 as a National Laboratory.
* SDOS MSG Project Manager, MSFC ISS Payloads Office, VP35, AIAA Member.
T NASA SAME Project Manager, GRC ISS & Human Research Projects Office , MAHO, AIAA Member
i NASA MSG Project Manager, MSFC ISS Payloads Office, VP35, AIAA Member
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2008 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
The U.S. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.
All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner.

"
"2","Introduction
The Mierogravity Science GlovebOX (MSG), shown in Fig. 1, is a research facility on—board the International
Space Station (188) in Which fundamental and applied scientific research is conducted that supports NASA’s
Vision for Space Exploration. The unique design of the facility allows it to accommodate science and technology
investigations in a “workbench” type environment. The facility has an enclosed working volume that is held at a
negative pressure With respect to the crew living area. This allows the 3:231:33, wpfy. Ryﬁgw/ﬂ , r ,_ ,
facility to provide two levels of containment for small parts, particulates, f‘ 1 ""2 3 M61191
ﬂuids, and gasses. The containment provided by the facility reduces the 191313“ {E ’2 W 1:3""?
safety requirements placed on the payload developer and facilitates the ""2’ ‘5,“ .113;ng ‘1 i 5"" 5 3
development of ﬂight hardware in close parallel with prototype or ‘,.—'~3‘_ , 41.11% W 1:11
breadboard hardware developed in ground based laboratories. Research 1““ 513111; 1 751213.; {5333
investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter 2 12 1‘ K5114??? 1
work volume, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply interface 1 ’2’ 11%..‘1 “:73 r
(120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 watts of cooling capability, Video and "" g :3. ‘ .. .1.
data recording and real time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, 5 711 Chg :- “ K}: 1 :31 ‘
access to 188 Vacuum Exhaust and Vacuum Resource Systems, and 11;; 111121 '25,: I
gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is an ideal 1? \ ' a5» / ""1’
platform for research required to advance the technology readiness » x"" ..' 1‘ ’
levels (TRL) needed for the Crew Exploration Vehicle and the .ﬂ; 4' \ﬁf"" A ’1/\
Exploration Initiative. In addition, the facility is ideally suited to provide ’ :\\.!a’\ 111‘
quick access to space for exploratory type investigations that are I \éﬁ» ‘2, 1 2
necessary to gain an initial understanding of the role of gravity in the \y #\\< 19‘—
physies associated With new research areas. Figure 1. The NTSG Flight Unit With
To facilitate the use of the MSG by the scientific community, an Astronaut Peggy Whitson.
integration team of engineers and support personnel is available at the
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to assist researchers With the complex task of building and operating an
experiment for space. The team advises experiment development groups on engineering issues during the design
phase of their investigation, assists With 188 manifesting and planning, and provides support through the testing and
analysis activities that are required to assure that experiments are compliant With 188 safety and interface
requirements. An engineering unit and development unit is available at MSFC for use during payload development,
verification, and on—orbit operation. A high fidelity training unit is located at the J ohnson Space Center for training
of ISS crew members. Once experiments are transported to the ISS, either by the NASA Shuttle, the Russian Soyuz
0r Progress vehicles, or the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), the crew installs
the experiment hardware in the MSG and configures it for operation. Depending on its design, the actual experiment
can be conducted either by the crew or by the ground—based investigator through two—way real—time data links.
Experiment progress can be monitored from the ground through the several MSG Video cameras, or cameras
embedded in the experiment. A telescience center at MSFC provides investigators a link to interact With the
experiment during ﬂight operations. The investigator can be located at either MSFC or their home laboratory, Where
1 they are connected Via communication links.
“ 1’: 2 I. Payload Interfaces and Resources Provided by MSG
1"""" ‘ 7,..7 ‘ _ The MSG facility is designed to be a versatile platform for space based
“ A ’11 2‘ <1 research. Many of the resources and interfaces found in the MSG are
§ ‘ {@011 1 compatible with those typically found in a ground based laboratory. Table 1
’33-. 7 “ n?"" ‘ '1 provides a Summary of the resources provided to experiments inside the
‘— - i ' _ E 4‘ 3-11 MSG facility. The following paragraphs provide a general over View of the
- “1 31: MSG capabilities. Additional detail is available on the MSG web site at
2_ 4:. l http://msg10veb0X.mst.nasa.g0V.
'1 . [Q1 1 A. The MSG Work Volume
. “j,k i The MSG work volume, as shown in Fig. 2 & Fig. 3, provides a large
‘ D ‘ *\I 1 area for set up and operation of experiment hardware. Payloads are loaded
~/‘ .ﬁﬁ-‘f‘ii‘? into the work volume Via the 406mm (16 in.) diameter loading ports
Figure 2. The MSG Rack
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Table 1. MSG Experiment Resource Summary
DESCRIPTION
POWER Three power interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 one 120 V DC, 83 Amp
0 two 28V DC/7 A, i 12V DC/2A, 5V DC/4A
Continuous power allocated to experimenter is a maximum of 1000 watts.
DATA Eight data interfaces are provide in the WV (two 1553 for MLC).
0 two digital (I/O) and analog input lines
0 two RS 422 serial lines
0 one connection to the Ethernet interfaces
0 one RS—422/RS232 feedthrough from the back wall to the front of the rack for
MLC use outside the WV to an investigation inside the WV
0 one user configurable feedthrough at the corner of the front Window.
VIDEO 0 two Sony DSR—V10 DV—CAM digital Video recorders (40 mitﬂtape)
0 two GV—A500 Hi—8 analog Video recorders (240 min/tape)
0 four Hitachi HV—C20 CCD full color cameras
0 two multi—input LCD monitors for crew monitoring,
EXPERIMENT LAPTOP IBM A31p with a 60 gigabyte hard drive and 1 gigabyte of RAM. 1 Ethernet, 1
COMPUTER RS232/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via operating system) interfaces. Windows
2000 (Service Pack 4) Operating System.
STRUCTURAL The WV provides for the attachment of hardware either by M6 inserts or bungee
cords.
0 Cold Plate: 24 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Airlock Top Lid: 18 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Rear Wall: 20 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Access Ports: 27 (each) M6 inserts at 100 pitch
0 Ceiling: Two locations containing 8 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
THERMAL A total of 1000 W can be dissipated from the WV.
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Cold Plate 2 800 W
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Air 2 200 W
VACUUM Two vacuum interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 Vacuum resource/venting is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
0 Vacuum exhaust/waste is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
AIR CIRCULATION 0 Max airﬂow rate of 1200 I/min and a max velocity of 0.044 m/s at the centerline
of the work volume.
0 Airﬂow can be varied between 15% and 100% depending on fan speed settings.
0 Negative pressures of 1.3 InB to at least 7 InB based on facility settings.
AIR FILTERING 0 Three filter banks in series provide WV air filtration. Each bank consists of 8
HEPA filters in parallel (4 front and 4 rear).
0 Particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size
ILLUMINATION Adjustable lighting available up to 1000 LuX incident light measured at the WV
center approximately 200 mm off the WV floor.
containment.
on the right and left sides. Hardware can be mounted to the floor, ceiling, back, and/or sides using M6 threaded
fasteners. An airlock is provided below the work volume Which allows items to be passed into the experiment area
Without compromising containment.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","B. Electrical Power Interfaces

The MSG receives, conditions, and distributes electrical power from the 188 Electrical Power System (EPS) t0
the MSG work volume for use by the investigation. The experiment hardware is provided a maximum of lOOOW of
power. The following primary and secondary supply power interfaces are provided inside the work volume.

,- 1'33 *___7,__,_ 315 . 46 100 - 51 ?E] _ 79
17""“; HAW}, m, Tm] ""ml, . an I
60 I I I I
,——~.~;—‘/ I :____. —- ,, I, ,. @223
‘ - :22-.-.2222-.2222222-2.22;;- ;.:.~:2;.- 3. ,5- 32.22.22, . . .533:-.::‘si2=$:=2:=“2$_ ég§$2:5§235""‘2‘-3=Sf‘32 3:? ‘2‘"" 3:""??? . :‘12‘2C'x‘i2x‘h2 .22 .3322“? 222.3 ' I,.I
222222“$‘*\W“\‘\\\\ 232.323.2222 I
15.6 I I —_ . 3""” _--_..._§ -/' s_mgﬂ - efi W$;__,I I I
. » I —- , 7"" Tiw‘ég'17W . . ,2 “q 2 1, “2—222 EXP [mun 2” "" I
I 7&1-3;LJx/T..4: “ (n) : 2 .2: ~ 22:. ~. gc-
1 . ‘12 | (?1 a c @ I? 47’ ‘Qa {D 1) e ., II
I a. I ‘ ‘I-I‘II- ‘II’H J lé 314 ~29 .r/I
I E ‘ ' “x. _.-,/ I J35 52;
I E _‘ “~33? Ivy . QTE :ﬁg/ 63. 5 {‘5
I241 65 71 2.132%; © © Q “Q _ , -- ,Gxtrx rxv 122m ?- -
I '3 9&5 ,// iv ¢ 3+0 E i/ \.‘ é .
I ,, . . . ._ ... :_P{V . L ‘H- Pw PW - ”I v :2
9 I ‘2 224$? \ J v-u .I-
DWW <2 2 @- ><2 . I 3. 2%
I , ‘ a ’3 r I D I ~ ‘
I ‘ - ' .f. \L f K"" ’u - I
. I I ?B l. ISJ I A a c c \T/ \\::/’ _ l‘p \'/ \ ‘ I
63.8 O ‘ I: W38 - 9‘ © ‘3’ © ‘éé . e. 1313 -
I ‘9. ""i'a—R'szee RS428 — 3MP -7 33
I .. ‘13:: '5“: J1"" I719“? JEQA ' ""
I I w; u — % é. .2""- ._ 'ap i
:I $2355 “2:? «2232* 2‘ ”e 3 “2 <2
I ,II""'I'I®®:{>( £‘eé III'III.|I'I'@@:(}I ‘.Q@ ""l‘IIIII III]: :d .a@ I'I'l ﬁll‘aa‘.‘ ( ).g€% "".I'I‘ fﬁng'd I”.°@ \""'~':,""|"".@@;gjé,r..e€3 ‘II'IIIIII I I
I 125 i .‘-I.£3§C%’§§§.""'I§%OO§F-§m ® 1%, Cj 33%;; 00322-2 0 f?fiyﬁgtger-gﬂ 59% I H
i «2 I$+-,%.+.:F-::§r~~2 «222.55%:{9r 2+; .212.” .- «22.; :3. ~© \ 9-3%“... 4» «gegggrw I
. ~ . ,xf-rf- : .v’ﬁf‘m . 1/12”“ , as 3 ‘ ,I”:’m ' . . 72.42 I 1
50, : @22ag nib ?\2-22 ggagséxéggﬁg ‘
Ir» «II a £222 .2 2 ’2‘» a o - a 30x M 1-,; I Iva 3,23 ~-
jg 2ﬁgsg%rgg%§m§g- e +35% «sggmé’g. ‘25: <2) 2%33200riﬁ:2.53§:g75i§§f2'
I 115 1""“ I""""I§1'@§ H ’ £22.93 «10’ 6: “mg U .' 'n‘"" i ' mi“ 221229 t 00 ewe r 0022-5-33- .
. . I; . 6 eye :24 x I: 90 . e .«e ,2 I \ﬁg W . ea o; @o r-
% NWW/ 3230/4, 2N“? .. \ 32/. N‘WV/ 2320/2 3
I If"" \_ x“ 2"""" "" “~“-L'-"" ‘11 \ “-’ —‘ ""- 2"""" \. ‘-’.:—.'~-ﬁm“- --’_-.:.--' _,‘ PK“.
I I I'\ . . W ,, WWWWWWWWW, ,. ”/,,./'I
17 49/; W / . _ ‘ ' P * 2‘9?wa ¢
46 133 ..
428
Figure 3. MSG Back Wall Layout.
0 Experiment Primary Power
+120 Vdc Power (120 Vdc, 8.3 A)
0 Experiment Secondary Power
28 Vdc Power, (+28 Vdc, 7 A)
+12 Vdc Power, (+12 Vdc, 2 A)
— 12 Vdc Power, (—12 Vdc, 2 A)
5 Vdc Power, (+5 Vdc, 8 A)

Secondary power sources are converted voltages derived from the DC/DC converters in the MSG Facility. To
receive power, experiment hardware must connect to the power supply connectors on the back wall of the work
volume shown in Fig. 3. The primary power connector (J 302) is supplied on a Mil—Spec type connector
MS27656P17F6SA. The experiment must connect to the primary power (120Vdc) with a Mil—Spec type connector
M827467T17F6PA. Secondary power (5, i 12, & 28 Vdc) connectors (J 303/J 325) are supplied on two
M827656P21F118 connectors in the work volume rear wall as shown in Figure 3. Researchers must connect to
secondary power using a connector of type MSZ7467T21F11P.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","C. Data Handling

The MSG data handling system allows for communication With the MSG facility and experiments plus
remote operation of the MSG facility and experiments operating inside the WV. The following interfaces are
provided to experiment hardware in the work volume; MIL—STD—1553B (Via the laptop computer), RS—422 Serial
Interface and Digital Input/Output (I/O) and Analog Input Interface. Investigations are also provided an Ethernet
interface that is directly connected to the ISS Ethernet.
D. Video Systems

The MSG Video System is provided to observe and record experiment behavior. The MSG Video Drawer
consists of the following: four Video recorders, multi—input LCD monitors, Hitachi HV—C20 CCD full color cameras,
touCh—pad, footswiteh and a headset/mierophone. The Video system has the capability to simultaneously record the
Video signal, display it on the monitors and downlink the Video signal to the ground. Experiments that provide their
own Video cameras must send both Composite and Y/C signals to the MSG Video system. The Composite Video
signal is used to View the camera images on the MSG monitors and for downlinking the Video signal. The MSG
Video recorders require the Y/C Video signal. Playback is possible on all of the recorders.

There are several ways to operate the Video system; it can be commanded from the ground, manually on the
recorder itself or by the use of a touCh—pad. The Video system provides the capability to annotate text onto the Video
signal and has a time counting system that can be recorded on the Video signal and displayed to the operator. The
Video system has time—lapse capability that allows for extended recording time. The time—lapse settings have two
variables that the investigator can Choose from, the length of recording and pause period. The range for the length of
recording is 0.5 to 25.5 seconds increasing in intervals of 1/10 a second, and the range for the pause period is 5 to
255 seconds in intervals of 1—see0nd steps.

There are two types of recorders used in the MSG Video system: two Sony DSR—V10 DV—CAM digital Video
recorders With 40 minutes of recording time per digital tape, and two GV—A500 Hi8MM analog recorders With 240
minutes of recording time per tape. Audio can be recorded simultaneously on all four Video recorders through the
MSG headset/mierophone.

E. Thermal Control Interfaces

The MSG Thermal Control Subsystem (TCS) provides both water cooling and avionics air cooling for
experiment hardware. Water cooling is provided by a 350 mm X 400 mm coldplate embedded in the WV floor. The
coldplate is located on the left side of the work
volume floor and is capable of dissipating 800W NORMAL MODE FLAPPER BANK RECQ/“IQESESSS'ON
under steady state conditions. Experiment PROCESSCONTROL ASSEMBLIES < /
hardware is mounted to the coldplate With M6 VALVES ‘_ a
threaded captive fasteners. Researchers can ' V i
tighten the fasteners as needed to meet their VL'—
thermal requirements but they must not exceed
60 in—lbs of torque.

The work volume air Circulation is '
established by the MSG Air Handling Unit
(AHU). The AHU heat exchanger provides 200 REFERENCEDUCT
W of investigation cooling, at an airﬂow rate of
1200 l/min and a maximum velocity of 0.044
m/s at the centerline of the work volume. The ‘
airﬂow can be varied between 15% and 100% I J
depending on fan speed settings. The filtration ilﬁ F
system provides for particulate removal, g""!
filtration of single spillage, and oxidation of CO AIRLOCK ”' FELET:ND
to C02 by means of a built—in catalyst. Due to :
the hydroseopie nature of the MSG filters, the DI CHECKVALVE
humidity inside the WV is maintained at or
below the 135 cabin ICVCL Fig- 4 PYOVidCS 8‘ Figure 4. MSG Air Circulation and Filtration.
block diagram of the MSG air flow.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","F. Experiment Laptop Computer

The current laptop provided to MSG experiments is an IBM A3lp With a 60 gigabyte hard drive and l gigabyte
of RAM. The laptop supports dual Ethernet, 1 RSZ32/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via operating system)
interfaces. The operating system is Windows 2000 (Service Pack 4).

Researchers are encouraged to use the server system on the laptop that was developed by the MSG integration
team. The laptop server system is a suite of applications that executes on the MSG Laptop Computer. The purpose
of the laptop server is to abstract the input/output of the system When experiment applications are running and
provide support for various on orbit operations. The laptop server abstracts the 1553B interface, the Serial
(R8232/RS422) connections and the Medium Rate Data Link (Ethernet). Instead of each application developer
spending the time and effort required to get familiar With each of these interfaces, they may concentrate upon their
specific application. The laptop server presents to the applications developer a relatively simple Application
Program Interface (API) that uses the basic Windows system function calls. The laptop server provides a consistent
interface to each application and allows multiple applications to share information through the defined application
interface. The laptop server also provides for extensive ground commanding support (Timelines & Process Control)
to support un—attended operation. All existing interfaces to the laptop have been verified and used in ﬂight so the
risk of having communication problems during on—orbit operations is greatly reduced. Researchers can use a simple
web based system that allows them to issue commands and display experiment sensor measurements Via HTML. By
utilizing the FTP server on the laptop, the experiment can take advantage of the laptop hard drive for storage of data
that can then be down linked using the 188 Medium Rate Data Link. In addition, the laptop provides a socket based
interface to the 1553 data stream for experiment data output.

G. Vacuum Resource/Exhaust and GN2 Subsystem

The MSG is connected to the 188 Vacuum Resource, 188 Vacuum Exhaust, and GN2 subsystems. The
experiment interface to these services is provided inside the WV. The vacuum resource/vent line may be used to
operate a furnace or achieve a course vacuum. The vacuum exhaust/waste gas system is used primarily for venting
gases or byproducts given off by the experiments. However, the quality of the vacuum at the experiment interface
may be lower than the l X 10'3 torr at the MSG interface due to pressure drops in the ducts, quick disconnects etc.
GN2 can be used to inert the internal atmosphere and may provide means for controlling humidity.

The experimenter is provided With quick disconnects at the rear wall of the WV to interface With the vacuum and
GN2 resources. The WV is equipped With manually operated ball valves for the vacuum resource and eXhaust lines
and a needle valve for the GN2 line. There are limitations on the type of gases and materials that can be exhausted
into the ISS vacuum system, and the temperature and pressure of the eXhaust gases. See the Mierogravity Science
Glovebox (MSG) Investigation Interface Requirements Document (MSFC—RQMT—2888) for detailed information on
connector types and interface requirements concerning the vacuum and GN2 subsystem.

H. Air Circulation and Filtration

The MSG air Circulation and filtration system is illustrated by Fig 4 _
and Fig. 5. The MSG Air Handling Unit (AHU) has three separate fans that MSG Flltel' Banks
draw air from the WV through the filter banks and blows this air through _.
the water to air heat exchanger, the Process Control Valves and into the Air '1” I ‘1: -
Discharge Duet, Where the air is re—directed towards the WV. These fans F ﬂ. . _ !
maintain the WV pressure lower than the cabin pressure. Any potentially i ff"" -' ' ~ I !
contaminated air can only leave the WV Via the reference outlet following ! f 'j i -"" i' "" '
filtration. When the MSG is operating in Normal mode, the process control I F- "" _ ,1 ' '
valve is set to allow the air in the WV to be recirculated through the filters, ! -1 * 1"" “if
the fans, the heat exchanger, and back into the WV. In this mode the WV 1 , _ ""_ .
will maintain a pressure differential of at least 1.3 mbar between the WV '- _'2- r h ""
and the outside. When MSG is operating in Sealed mode, the process Airloel(ﬁ""*---j- -
control valve outlets are sealed off, the fans are off, and no unfiltered air can ._.,m \i :
leave the WV. This mode is also used for experiments not requiring air T“ _ -
circulation in the WV. * - {1,-

As shown in Fig. 5, the MSG facility has three filter banks. Each filter . ‘f
bank has a set of four parallel front filters on a front filter plate and a set of
four parallel rear filters on a rear filter plate. The rear filters provide a , ,
backup filter system. Each front filter consists of four basic elements Figure 5' MSG Filter Banks.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","arranged in a specific order. These is a Wire mesh Which serves as a barrier for ﬂame propagation, High—Efficiency
Particle Air (HEPA) filter elements for particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size, an activated carbon element for
adsorbing solvents, Chemicals and gases, and a monolith element for oxidizing combustion products like carbon
monoxide. The rear filter is redundant With the front filter in its ability to filter organic solvents and convert carbon
monoxide, there is no HEPA installed in the rear filters. The MSG air Circulation system can provide up to 200W of
cooling.

I. Illumination

Three identical illumination units in the top of the WV provide the illumination of the working area. The three
illumination units combine to provide 1,000 LuX maximum illumination at approximately 200 mm above the center
of the WV ﬂoor. The general illumination is variable in intensity. At the maximum intensity the color temperature is
> 2,750 K, With color rendering index (RA) 0f 85 or better. The Airlock illumination provides 323 LuX general
working light. The illumination units can be switched on and off manually by the crew or remotely from the ground.
J . Airlock

The airlock, shown in Fig. 5, is a bOX—like structure attached to the bottom plate of the WV With an allowable
work area of approximately 26 liters. There is no active thermal conditioning in the airlock. The airlock temperature
is ambient, air Circulation provides conditioning of the airlock atmosphere only. Airlock illumination can be
switched on and off manually or remotely. The airlock front door provides a Lexan Window and a glove port. The
front door can be fully removed for ease of loading investigation hardware With the dimensions of 254 mm (10"") by
343 mm (13.5 "") by 299 mm (11.7""). The Airlock top lid in the WV contains 18 M6 inserts on a 70 X 70 mm grid for
threaded fastener hardware mounting. The Airlock top lid can be removed completely and can be locked to create a
leak tight airlock connection. The topside 0f the airlock lid is equipped With a removable handle for the actuation of
the locking mechanism. When the handle is removed, a complete ﬂat surface is available for use inside the WV. An
oven—like concept is used inside the airlock to allow for ease in payload transfer from the airlock t0 the WV. The
concept consists of a tray, Which can be placed at two different heights or completely removed from the airlock. The
tray is equipped With seven bungee cords for attaching payloads. The filter used in the airlock is the same type as
used in the WV. Power is not available for experiments inside the airlock. The temperature and humidity of the
Airlock is monitored and is available in the MSG downlink data. Fig. 5 shows the location of the airlock 0n the
bottom right corner of the MSG work volume.

K. Available MSG Facilities

The MSG project hardware consists of an operational Flight Unit on—board the International Space Station, a
high fidelity training unit at the Johnson Space Center (J SC), a ground unit at the Marshall Space Flight Center
(MSFC), and a ﬂight equivalent engineering unit at MSFC. The ground unit is functionally equivalent to the ﬂight
unit and is available to researchers for development testing and fit Checks. The engineering unit is identical to the
ﬂight unit and is used to fully verify experiment compatibility prior to ﬂight. In addition, the engineering unit is
available for troubleshooting 0f in—ﬂight anomalies during ﬂight operations. The MSG project also provides
researchers With a ﬂight like A31P laptop computer as resources allow.

A telescience center at MSFC provides researchers a link to interact With the experiment during ﬂight operations.
The investigator can be located at either MSFC or their home laboratory, Where they are connected Via
communication links. The entire communication loop from the telescience center to the payload in the MSG can be
simulated using the MSG engineering unit and the telescience facilities at MSFC. This allows for a thorough Check
out of payload hardware, software, and communication systems prior to ﬂight and affords the researcher a high
degree of confidence that the planned experiment Will be successful in orbit.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","11. Overview of the Research Accomplished in the MSG Facility to Date
To date, the MSG facility has logged over 3500 hours of 0n—0rbit operations processing 16 investigations.
Areas of science that have benefited from experiments in the MSG include, ﬂuid physics, materials science,
combustion, thermal control, protein crystal growth, fire detection, and technology demonstration. The paragraphs
that follow contain a brief synopses 0f the investigations that have been performed in the MSG.
A. United States Sponsored Investigations
Solidification Using a Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (S UBSA )1

One of the first materials science experiments on the International Space Station — the Solidification Using a
Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA) investigation was conducted during Expedition 5 inside the Microgravity
Science Glovebox. SUBSA was the first experiment to operate in the MSG facility on the International Space
Station.

The main objective of the SUBSA investigation was to improve science’s understanding of the formation of
semiconductor crystals. Semiconductor crystals are used for many products such as computer Chips, integrated
Circuits, sensors for medical imaging equipment, and detectors of nuclear radiation.

To control the opto—electronic properties of the semiconductor crystals, a small amount of an impurity — named
a dopant — has to be added to the pure semiconductor. Uniform distribution of the dopant in the semiconductor
crystal is essential for production of opto—electronic devices.

For the SUBSA investigation, tellurium and zinc were used as dopants in an indium antimonide sample. The
samples were heated to 850 degrees Celsius and then directionally solidified to form a solid single crystal. The
SUBSA samples were loaded in Clear quartz arnpoules and the SUBSA thermal Chamber had a transparent gradient
zone which allowed the entire process to be captured on Video. Indium antimonide was selected because of its low
melting point of around 525 degrees Celsius and because it is useful for creating models that apply to a variety of
semiconductors. During processing, the scientist was able to observe the down linked Video images and command
the furnace from the telescience center at the Marshall Space Flight center to position the solid/liquid interface in the
most optimum position prior to the start of directional solidification. This unique capability, provided by the MSG
facility, allowed the scientist to optimize the investigation real time, and maximize the scientific return.

The SUBSA investigation was setup 0n—0rbit by Astronaut Perry Whitson and completed operation in October
2002 as part of Expedition 5. The SUBSA investigation was designed and built by TeC—Masters Inc. under contract
with the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama.

T awards Understanding Pore F ormation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidification in a
Microgravity Environment (PFMI)2

The PFMI investigation sought to improve science’s understanding of solidification processes and the effects of
imperfections in the molten material. On Earth when scientists melt metals, bubbles that form in the molten material
can rise to the surface, pop and disappear. In microgravity, the lighter bubbles do not rise and disappear. Prior space
experiments have shown that bubbles often become trapped in the final metal or crystal sample. In the solid, these
bubbles, 0r porosity, are defects that diminish both the material’s strength and usefulness.

The Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation melted samples of a transparent modeling material,
succinonitrile (SCN) and succinonitrile water mixtures. The transparent material allowed scientists to observe how
bubbles form in the samples and study their movements and interactions.

The PFMI experiments heated the SCN samples to approximately 120 degrees Celisus and directionally
solidified them at translation velocities of 0.5 micrometers per second up to 10 micrometers per second. Two
cameras were used to collect real—time images of the samples as they were melted and subsequently resolidified in
the thermal Chamber.

Images were sent to the investigator on the ground working in the telescience center at Marshall Space Flight
Center. The investigator manipulated the investigation by sending commands to Change temperatures, growth rates
and other variables that affected sample processing.

The PFMI investigation processed over 20 samples in orbit and was returned on STS—116 in December 2006.
The PFMI hardware and software was designed and built by TeC—Masters Inc. under contract with the NASA
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama.

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","Investigating the Structure ofParamagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)3

The InSPACE investigation examined the way small magnetic particles interacted with the complex properties
found in magnetorheological ﬂuids. Magnetorheological (MR) ﬂuids are a class of ""smart "" materials capable of
providing a rapid, controllable response when a . “ .‘. "" .
magnetic field is applied. The 10w—graVity ,
International Space Station environment allowed ' “v’
research on particle interaction without the effects of 1“ . ’ 4' A
sedimentation. An objective of the InSPACE «'- __ g .3. 55 . A""
investigation was to determine the true three— I ' : \ :7"": _‘ .v.” .. 7.74/ ‘/
dimensional 10w—energy structure of a MR emulsion in / ‘ ‘ . 1 . ' ‘ . \ .0
a pulsed magnetic field. The InSPACE investigation (/ ‘ ,. r39-.. -""’ ‘32::7f ;; :7; '1
Visually studied the final, fine structure of the MR "" - _ ""'“' E4. {ff}
ﬂuid in a pulsed magnetic field. This study helped ‘ . -E: Ia . LN“
researchers understand the competing forces that ‘ _' _- ae'gxw; . . ‘ W.
govern the final shape of the structures. ’ \ _‘__’ i g 7 I

The InSPACE hardware consisted of five major ' J"" , ,. > \
parts: the Helmholtz coil assembly containing the ~ '
sealed Vial that holds the MR ﬂuid; an optics assembly . mm
with two long working—distance lenses, cameras, and s 0 Figure 6. InSPACE Operating in MSG On-Orbit.
base plate; an avionics assembly containing two
displays, a square—wave generator, and the power distribution box; the light source assembly; and three Video
recorders, which are part of the Microgravity Science GlovebOX (MSG). The crew inserts the coil assemblies into
the optics plate. The square—wave generator then sends pulsed power input along the Helmholtz coil, generating a
magnetic field in the ﬂuid. The cameras, equipped with microscopic lenses, record the activities of the ﬂuid
microstructures with and without the magnetic field.

The original InSPACE experiments were operated by Astronaut Don Pettit as part of Expedition 6. Two
additional coil assemblies and eight sample Vials were launched to 188 on STS—120/ 10A, October 23, 2007. The
InSPACE hardware is scheduled to be installed in the MSG in January 2008 and operations will be completed
before the MSG is moved to the Columbus Orbiting Facility (COF) in mid February 2008.

Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures-Z (CSLM-2)4
CSLM—2 is a materials science experiment designed to study the rate at which particles of tin suspended in a
liquid comprised of molten tiIﬂlead alloy, increase
. . ‘- ‘- "" _. in size, a process called coarsening.
' "" '~ ; ‘ “- ' , CSLM—2 used the microgravity environment on
, t ; ,. U ., the 188 to prevent the tin particles from rising to the
' ‘ 3%,, . 9'ﬁ¢a€??*?” top of . the. mixture. as well. as to eliminate
. , ' -7, ‘ ‘< _ 7 ff"" convection in the timlead mixture, Wthh can
. ~ ' ': - 1;“? “aw ' / inﬂuence coarsening.
'1' .3). 5 * f x . In any mixture that contains particles of
) , \_ ‘ i __ -.. different sizes, the large particles tend to grow
' ° ‘ '- — ""‘ ' ‘ 0' . while the smaller particles shrink in a process called
;,;..W Jr ‘ . ' . ' . “_. ' R coarsening. Tiny oil droplets coalescing into a large
#ﬂ— ‘ H . ' r - ' .. ._,, “®- blob are one illustration, but the process occurs in
. TL ' ' ' ’ .-. .' solids as well. Coarsening occurs on Earth during
’ .‘ A , ‘.*-"""""""" .3 the processing of any metal alloy and thus the

1 ' \ , ‘ grit) ' ' ’m ‘ coarsening process affects products from dental
.ssomm ‘ ‘ fillings t0 turbine blades. Since the properties of an

Figure 7. CSLM-2 Setup in MSG Engineering Unit. alloy are linked to the size of the particles within

the solid, coarsening can be used to strengthen
materials. This is the case with the majority of aluminum alloys used commercially today. Conversely, if the
coarsening process proceeds too long the material can weaken. This occurs in jet turbine blades and is one of the
reasons why turbine blades must be replaced after a certain number of hours of service. Thus developing accurate
models of the coarsening process is central to creating a wide range of new materials from those used in automobiles
to those used in space applications. The results of previous experiments performed on the Shuttle have done just
that. These models have been incorporated into a computer code that is being used to design many new materials,
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","including materials of importance to NASA's spaceﬂight program. Solid—liquid systems are ideal systems to study
this coarsening process. However, gravity can induce particle sedimentation and thus hamper the studies of
coarsening in these mixtures on Earth.

The CSLM—2 Experiment in the MSG consists of an Electronics Control Unit (ECU), Sample Processing Unit
(SPU) and associated cables and mounting hardware. The SPU is an evacuated thermal Chamber which will heat the
samples to 185 0C for a specified duration. At the conclusion of the heat soak time the samples will be quenched
utilizing a pressurized water reservoir. The ECU is a microprocessor based data acquisition and control system
designed specifically for conducting the CSLM—2 experiment. The CSLM—2 hardware interfaces to the MSG power,
communications, and vacuum resources in support of experiment operations.

Data gathered by the CSLM—2 experiment will advance the development of new high—temperature materials,
such as those used in nuclear propulsion and waste heat coolant processes by investigating the kinetics of
competitive particle growth within a liquid matrix. During this process, called coarsening, small particles shrink by
losing atoms to larger particles causing the larger particles to grow or coarsen. The science team is headed by
Professor Peter Voorhees of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwest University

On August 8, 2007, five CSLM—2 SPUs were launched on the Space Shuttle Endeavour for operations onboard
the International Space Station that started November 2007. All five SPUs were processed by December 31, 2007.
The SPUs will be returned to the ground on STS—122/ 1E (J an 08) and STS—123/lJ/A (Feb 08). The experiment was
designed and built by ZIN Technologies Inc under contract with the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland,
Ohio.

Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)5

The SAME investigation was developed by the '3 ' __-:~'wi___% ' s i. \
NASA Glenn Research Center, ZIN Technologies, "" “ff f“ g; 1,,- E .. ,. T’ .. ' "" ' \
and the National Institute of Standards and , g ‘ l. {Eag’liﬂzﬂﬁng i3¥.$1%§ I II a ,
Technologies (NIST). The SAME experiment is y. ‘ z i 9 4 3:4 g 773! ’1’, '
designed to determine the particle size distributions 3 ‘; J , m. J r ’t
of the smokes generated from a variety of l +.’ ' 5W :e—Qyéia 3: ' f y ' ‘
overheated spacecraft materials and from ' l l ' ‘ ii ' é: 4S. \J
microgravity fires. The objective is to provide the 7 i f,” . ‘4"" ‘ ‘ _‘}/_'_3‘~‘ ’ ‘
data that spacecraft designers need to properly A ~ J.‘ , _ '1 Z l; .
design and implement fire detection in spacecraft. —. ”ﬁx? 7:7; ., J
This investigation will also evaluate the . Q} s -l‘- (‘5 9', ' '
performance of the smoke detectors currently in use ' g ff: 3 44/2 ‘_ J
aboard the space shuttle and 188. \ I "" -' *

Spacecraft smoke detectors must detect different .. ~1— m ‘ 3‘ . A
types of smoke. For example, hydrocarbon fuels :5?"" ., ' l .
typically produce soot and plastics procluee droplets 53015525255 Figure 8. S AME in MS G On-Orbit.
of reeondensed polymer fragments. While paper and
silicone rubber produce smoke comprised of liquid droplets of recondensed pyrolysis products. Each of these
materials produces a different type of smoke, with particles of various sizes and properties.

SAME will assess the size and distribution of smoke particles produced by different types of material found on
spacecraft such as, Teﬂon, Kapton, cellulose and silicone rubber. SAME will evaluate the performance of the
ionization smoke detectors (used on Space Shuttles), evaluate the performance of the photoelectric smoke detectors
(used on the ISS) and collect data for which a numerical formula can be developed and used to predict smoke
droplet growth and to evaluate alternative smoke detection devices on future spacecraft

The SAME experiment will provide technology for an advanced fire detector for future spacecraft that will be
used for long duration missions. SAME will provide quantitative data on the sensitivity of these detectors to reduced
gravity smokes that will allow evaluation of the adequacy of these existing technologies using relevant data. The
current Fire Prevention, Detection, and Suppression (FPDS) program plan allows for the re—evaluation of future
sensor technology, to allow new technology and capability to be utilized. The results from SAME are needed to
provide the reduced gravity baseline data against which future detection technology developments can be evaluated.
The smoke detectors developed from the results of SAME can also be useful in other extreme environments on
Earth, such as submarines or underwater laboratories. The SAME investigation was designed and built by ZIN
Technologies Inc. under contract with the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","Shear History Extensional Rheology Experiment (SHERE)6

The main objective of SHERE is to study the effect of rotational preshear 0n the extensional behavior of a ﬂuid.
Of specific interest is the transient evolution of the microstructure and Viscoelastie tensile stresses that are present
during the extension of the ﬂuid.

The combination of both shearing and extensional ﬂows is common in many polymer—proeessing operations
such as extrusion, blow—molding and fiber spinning. Therefore, knowledge of the complete rheological properties of
the polymer ﬂuid is required in order to accurately predict and account for its ﬂow behavior. In addition, if
numerical simulations are to serve as a priori design tools for optimizing polymer processing operations, then it is
critical to have an accurate knowledge of the extensional Viscosity and its variation with temperature, concentration,
molecular weight, and strain rate.

Unlike common Newtonian ﬂuids, complex ﬂuids such as polymers cannot be Characterized by a single material
parameter such as the Newtonian (shear) Viscosity. Instead, they eXhibit nonlinear responses to imposed
deformations. The extensional function of non—Newtonian ﬂuids is not constant but depends on both the rate of
deformation and the total strain experienced by a ﬂuid , . _
element. _ ‘ ' "".. _ _ _ J H r

A Class of dilute polymer solutions, collectively 1"" ' --.-_;-_- . , : U _ r , 3‘""
referred to as ‘Boger ﬂuids,’ has become a popular f, IE- *_ -_ _ _ ,— _ _ I, j. 53
Choice for rheological studies of non—Newtonian ﬂuids ”I '_'-_-' w; - W .- H' ”h - ‘ ”J A; -'
and will be used in the SHERE experiment. Theseideal _ _ ____ __ = -- El ' J "" s,-
elastiC ﬂuids eXhibit a nearly constant shear Viscosity, "" . . . ﬂ .' ;_ '- ._ .-
whiCh allows a direct comparison of Boger ﬂuids with _ _ _1 .3 ' —_I— _ _
Newtonian ﬂuids having similar viscosities. The high d- .: _--.--_.-u r: I __ Ii 5'"" ' _

Viscosity of the suspending solvent results in long -. _ ,. ._a""' ""' -:. "" "" '

relaxation times and substantial normal stresses, and ‘g ‘31 I \
. . . -. ' ' II]-

the low concentration of high molecular weight _"" Er...

polymers facilitates modeling analysis. _ ' a 1 ,l - '

SHERE is designed to ﬂy in the Mierogravity _ _ __ _' "" _
Science GlovebOX (MSG) 0n the International Space El. . ‘I
Station (188). The main SHERE hardware consists of ' 3- ' . J- *3""-
the interfaee bOX, rheometer, camera arm, cabling, m; '_ ' ' _ _
keyboard. In addition, there are 25 ﬂuid modules in a Figure 9. SHERE Setup in MSG Engineering Unit.
stowage tray. The interface bOX contains all power
distribution, controllers, and data acquisition and storage. It also contains the Video system that combines the camera
View and data display onto one Video signal for recording and downlink. The rheometer contains the rotational
preshear motor, translation slider, sensitive force transducer, electroluminescent backlight panel, laser micrometer,
and thermistors. During operation it will also contain one of the 25 ﬂuid modules. The camera arm attaches to
rheometer for Video recording of the stretched ﬂuid’s shape. The tool box contains miscellaneous tools used during
setup and operation of the experiment. The keyboard is used to control the experiment with the help of the MSG
Video monitor. The 25 ﬂuid modules contain the ﬂuid that will be sheared and stretched during the course of the
experiment. Each ﬂuid module contains prepackaged Boger ﬂuid, and all samples are identical. Figure 9 shows the
SHERE hardware assembled in the MSG Engineering Unit (EU) during integrated testing at the Marshall Space
Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.

The SHERE experiment hardware was launched to 188 on STS—l20/ 10A, October 23, 2007. Current plans are to
launch ﬂuid modules on STS—l26ﬂJLF2 (September 2008) and perform the experiments in the MSG during
Increment 19 which begins April 2009.

B. European Space Agency Sponsored Investigations

Since the inception of the MSG program, ESA has developed and operated nine successful investigations in the
MSG facility. Four experiments were developed by BSA as part of the Belgian TaXi Flight (BTF). The
investigations included COSMIC, DCCO, Nanoslab, and PromISS—l. This series of experiments were a part of the
science research activities performed in November 2002 aboard the 188 by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of
Belgian nationality. Nanoslab encountered technical difficulties and was not able to complete all of the scientific
objectives.

In October 2003, Spanish astronaut, Pedro Duque, performed MSG investigations Nanoslab and PromISS—2 as
part of the Spanish Soyuz Mission. The Nanoslab investigation was a follow on to the Nanoslab investigation that
encountered technical difficulties during the Belgian TaXi Flight. Duque spent eight days aboard the Space Station

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","conducting science experiments under a commercial contract between BSA and the Russian Aviation and Space
Agency.

In April 2004, MSG investigations HEAT and ARGES were operated as part of the Dutch Soyuz Mission. The
experiments were performed by Dutch ESA cosmonaut / astronaut Andre Kuipers who was launched to 188 from the
Russian launch site Baikonur on April 19th, 2004.

A thirty day PromISS—3 investigation was performed in J anuary and February of 2004. The same setup was also
used during another thirty day PromISS—4 investigation that started in J anuary 2006. Other PromISS investigations
are planned for future operations in the MSG. This illustrates the usefulness of the MSG facility. The primary
investigation hardware remains on—board and future investigations require relatively little up mass to deliver new
samples for follow on experiments.

The following paragraphs provide a brief summary explanation of these ESA investigations. For more detailed
information concerning these investigations, please refer to the European Space Agency web page at
http_://www.esa.int.

Combustion Synthesis under Microgravity Conditions ( COSMI C )7

COSMIC studied mierostrueture formation of compressed powder samples (in easu Ti—Al—B) during self—
propagating high—temperature combustion processes (SHS). The main scientific objective was the investigation of
the relationship between general physiCO—Chemical mechanisms of combustion and formation of the microstructure
and composition fields. The COSMIC experiment was a part of the science research activities performed aboard the
188 by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of Belgian nationality in the frame of the ODISSEA Project. The European
Space Agency and Belgian Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs (OSTC) were responsible
for preparation and implementation of the scientific program.

Microgravity Experiment For the Measurement ofDiffusion Coefﬁcients in Crude Oil (DCC0)8

This research program aims to investigate the isothermal diffusion and the Soret effect (thermodiffusion). The
scientific community and petroleum industries have a great interest in the accurate measurements of diffusion and
Soret coefficients. The DCCO experiment objective was to measure diffusion coefficients of ternary mixtures of
organic compounds. The experimental data set included different liquid mixture mass fractions. The mixtures were
composed of n—dodeeane, tetrahydronaphthalene and isobutylbenzene that are compounds representative of the
crude oil Chemical families. The principle was to introduce liquid A into a column of the ternary mixture B by
removal of a slider gate. During the three to five hours—eXpeCted diffusion duration, the process was monitored with
a dual wavelength MaCh—Zehnder interferometer, measuring the Change in refractive index induced by concentration
gradients. From the resulting interferograms recorded on a photo camera, the concentration gradients are derived as
a function of time. The DCCO experiment was performed by Belgian astronaut Frank de Winne as part of the
Belgian TaXi Flight.

NANOSLAB9

NANOSLAB is physical sciences investigation involving zeolites. Zeolites are crystal formations with
structured spaces or pores that allow them to absorb or hold onto other materials such as water. The NANOSLAB
research has significance in areas including the petrochemical industry. The aim of this experiment is to try and
create more effective zeolite crystal structures by mixing different zeolite solutions with a range of erystal—forming
catalysts. The NANOSLAB experiment was conducted by Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque as part of the Spanish
Soyuz Mission.

Protein Microscope for the International Space Station (PromISS- 1, 2, 3& 4 )10

The PromISS investigations are a study of the crystallization of proteins in microgravity conditions. These
investigations seek to provide information that will lead to a better understanding of the fundamental processes
underlying the protein crystallization process. The major objective of the experiments is to produce a detailed
analysis and quantitative interpretation of the relationship between the quality of the crystals and the environment in
which they were produced. The obj eetives are to:

0 Further evaluate the effect of microgravity 0n crystal quality, as compared to experiments in gel.
0 Confirm that the removal of convection by the use of gels has a similar effect as microgravity
0 Quantify the relationship between position of growth of the crystal and crystal quality.
12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","The PromISS investigation uses a Digital Holography Microscope to analyze the crystallization process. The
PromISS—l experiment was performed during the Belgian TaXi Flight in November 2002. Preliminary results
obtained show that the instrument was strongly affected by Vibrations and the temperature profile of the mission.
These factors had a bad impact on the quality of the results obtained.

An upgraded version of the PromISS—l hardware, called PROMISS—2 was uploaded with Progress HP in August
2003 and operated as part of the Spanish Soyuz Mission (SSM). SiX PROMISS experiment cells were uploaded
with the Soyuz 7S, analyzed with the PROMISS—2 optical diagnostic hardware over 10 days, and downloaded with
the Soyuz 68.

The PromISS—3 experiment was a re—ﬂight 0f the previous PromISS—2 experiment performed during the Spanish
Soyuz Mission, but with an investigation of the experimental cells in the Digital Holography Microscope 0f 30 days.
After the 30 day processing, the samples were stowed in an incubator (AQUARIUS) for 2 months, and then returned
on Soyuz 88. The PromISS—3 & 4 experiments are an adaptation of a digital holography instrument developed by
ULB —MRC for the observation of counter—diffusion experiments in microgravity. This instrument provided a View of
the crystallization reactions in terms of density gradients in the solution and 0f the localization of the crystals. The
observation of the density gradients should make it possible to evaluate models of the diffusion and residual
convection in the crystallization process. This information, together with the localization of the crystals, and the
observation of the timing of their growth, can allow the identification of the growth conditions of the crystals. This
information can then be related to crystal quality and internal order.

Heat transfer performance ofa grooved heat pipe (Heat)11

Heat was an investigation of the effectiveness of grooved heat pipes in the weightlessness of space. The main
aims of this technology demonstration were ;

0 The characterization of the heat transfer performance of a grooved heat pipe in weightlessness, by measuring the
maximum rate of heat ﬂow sustainable in three different modes:

— Anti—parallel heating/cooling (i.e. heating from one side of the pipe then cooling from opposite side).

— Mixed heating/cooling conditions (i.e. heating from two sides of the pipe then cooling from one of these sides)
0 The validation of the existing mathematical model that is used to evaluate the performances of new heat pipes.

0 To prove that the grooved heat pipe design can cope with the formation and trapping of vapor bubbles in the
pipe. A build up of vapor 0n the inner surface of a pipe creates an insulating layer, which reduces the pipes
effectiveness to transfer heat.

The Heat investigation was performed in April 2004 as part of the Dutch Soyuz Mission.

ARGES Investigation -- Energy efﬁcient lamps for the future”

The ARGES investigation sought to improve the understanding of High—Intensity Discharge (HID) lamps and
how they are affected by imperfections. The ARGES experiment examined these HID lamps in the microgravity
environment of the International Space Station.

The ceramic container of a HID lamp holds several metal gasses, sealed under high pressure. If a powerful
electrical current runs through the gaseous content, the metal atoms in the gas pick up energy and radiate light.
However, over time the gaseous contents begin to de—rniX or separate away from each other. As a consequence not
every part of the lamp has an equivalent amount of energy to transfer into light.

Unstable plasma channels and de—mixed gasses are the two biggest problems in HID lamps. Therefore, the main
objectives of the ARGES experiment were to determine which factors were causing these two problems. To do this,
the ARGES investigation employed a high—resolution emission spectrometer to analyze a series of individually
lighted HID lamps. Each light—producing gas in the HID has its own spectrum. The emission spectrometer was used
to determine which gases were present in small areas within the lamp.

Like the Heat investigation, the ARGES investigation was performed in April 2004 as part of the Dutch Soyuz
Mission.

111. Future MSG Investigations

The many capabilities of the MSG detailed in this paper, make it an ideal platform for research required to
advance the technology readiness levels (TRL) needed for the Crew Exploration Vehicle and the Exploration
Initiative. Related areas of research that will benefit from investigations in the MSG include combustion, ﬂuids
physics, thermal control, fire suppression and detection, in situ fabrication and repair, material science, and life

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","sciences. Investigations currently planned for operation in the MSG include BXF, ZBOT, CCF, SPICE, SODI,
CWRW, IVGEN, and CETSOL. The following paragraphs provide and brief overview of MSG investigations that
are planned for operation in the next two years.

A. Investigations Planned for N ear Term Operation in the MSG Facility

Boiling eXperiment F acility (BXF)13

The BXF investigation Will obtain data needed to understand the process involved With boiling in gravity and
microgravity. The research should enable the development of more efficient cooling systems on future spacecraft
and on Earth.

Boiling efficiently removes large amounts of heat by generating vapor from liquid. It is being used in electric
power plants, electronic cooling and purification and separation of Chemical mixtures. An upper limit, called the
critical heat ﬂuX, eXists Where the heater is covered With so much vapor that liquid supply to the heater begins to
decrease. Supplying constant power above this limit for prolonged periods can increase the heater temperature to the
point whereby the heater is destroyed. Determination of critical heat ﬂuX in microgravity is essential for designing
cooling systems for space. Therefore, boiling is being studied to increase the effectiveness of cooling in space.

The Boiling eXperiment Facility (BXF) Will house two separate investigations, BXF—MABE and BXF—NPBX.
The purpose of the BXF is to validate models being developed for heat transfer coefficients, critical heat ﬂuX and
the pool boiling curves. The BXF hardware is scheduled to be transported to 188 in November 2009 by Space
Shuttle Endeavour STS— 1 30/ 19A.

Zero Boil- Off T ank Experiment (ZBOT)14

The ZBOT investigation will improve the scientific understanding of the storage of cryogenic ﬂuids in low
gravity conditions. Effective, affordable, and reliable cryogenic ﬂuid storage is essential for propellant and life
support systems on interplanetary spacecraft. The Zero—Boil—Off (ZBO) approach is an innovative means of
controlling storage tank pressure by eliminating tank self—pressurization through a synergetic application of passive
multilayer insulation, an active heat removal system, and a forced mixing mechanism. ZBOT will result in design
guides for cryogenic ﬂuid storage tanks and a database of microgravity ﬂuid management data for specific in—orbit
or on surface applications. The end goal is to deliver cost—effective, reliable, and enabling design concepts for long—
term storage of cryogenic ﬂuids used in life support and propulsion.

The technology to be developed applies equally to short duration (50—100) day storage applications for the
envisioned 2010—2015 missions to the earth’s neighborhood and to long duration 100—1000 days interplanetary
missions beyond 2015. Consequently ZBOT Will encompass both microgravity storage in low and high earth orbit
and reduced gravity storage on the lunar, Martian or other planetary surfaces. The ZBOT hardware is scheduled to
be transported to 188 in February 2010 by Space Shuttle Discovery STSl31ﬂJLF4/.

Critical Velocities in Open Capillary Channels (CCF)15

The CCF Experiment refers to a versatile experiment program for studying an important variety of inertial—
capillary dominated ﬂows that are of basic interest in ﬂuid physics and at the same time key to certain space
applications, but cannot be studied on the ground. Applications of the results are directed to the portion of the
aerospace community Challenged by the containment, storage, and handling of large liquid inventories (fuels,
cryogens, water) aboard spacecraft. The results are expected to be immediately useful for the design and testing, and
instrumentation for verification and validation of liquid management systems of current orbiting, design stage, and
advanced spacecraft. The results Will also be useful to improved life support system design, phase separation, and
enhancing current system reliability by designing into the system passive (in this case ‘Capillary’) redundancies.
The CCF hardware is scheduled to be transported to 188 in November 2009 by Space Shuttle Endeavour STS—
130/ 19A.

Smoke Point in Coﬂow Experiment (SPICE)16

The smoke—point phenomena is a Classical metric in the understanding of the heat release and spread rate of fires.
It is commonly used in 1—g fire modeling and by extension Will be of value for predicting the heat release rate of
low—gravity fires. The Laminar Soot Processes (LSP) experiment has shown that the onset of the microgravity
smoke point in a quiescent environment is very different from that seen in normal gravity. SPICE seeks to extend
our understanding by looking at the interaction of ambient ﬂow With the smoke point, enabling us to better predict
heat release from low—gravity fires and to better predict their growth rate.

Current NASA spacecraft materials selection is based upon a simplified test method (NASA—STD—6001 Test 1)
that segregates material based upon 1—g behavior Without real consideration of low—g effects. Improved
14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","understanding of heat release from low—g fires Will allow more complete and effective utilization of the results.
These results can be used in first—order models and predictions of heat release in spacecraft fires and as a means to
extend heat release data from tests like the NASA eone—Calorimeter test (NASA—STD—6001 Test 2) t0 low—gravity
fires to a performance based material selection process. SPICE Will be ﬂown to the International Space Station
(188) in J anuary 2009 on Shuttle ﬂight STS—128/ 17A.
Selectable Optics Diagnostics Instrument (S0DI)17
The SODI hardware is being designed by the European Space Agency (ESA) to operate in the MSG facility and
accommodate the Diffusion and Soret Coefficients (DSC) measurement investigation, the Inﬂuence of Vibration 0n
Diffusion in Liquids (IVIDIL) investigation, and the Aggregation of Colloidal Solutions (COLLOID) investigation.
The objective of this series of investigations is to;
0 Study diffusion and Soret phenomena and measurement of these coefficients in multi—Component mixtures
(liquids).
0 Study the inﬂuence of controlled Vibration stimuli on these diffusion processes.
0 Study the aggregation (clustering) of colloidal solutions.
The instrumentation Will employ several optical diagnostic methods including;
0 Mach Zehnder interferometry (M21)
0 Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM)
0 Near Field Scattering (NFS)
0 Particle Image Veloeimetry (PIV)
0 Photogrammetry (PM)
These methods Will be used to analyze a selection of liquids and gases in the microgravity environment. The
SODI hardware Will be transported to 188 on Shuttle ﬂight STS—128/17A and the launch vehicle Japanese
HTVl.
Cell Wall/Reverse Genetic Approach to Exploring Genes Responsible for Cell Wall Dynamics in Supporting
T issues of Arabidopsis Under Microgravity Conditions and Resist Wall/Role 0f Microtubule-Membmne-Cell
Wall Continuum in Gravity Resistance in Plants (CWRW) 18
The Arabidopsis thaliana is considered the ideal model for plant research in the area of genetics and plant
growth. CWRW is an investigation of the Arabidopsis thaliana
3:333! _ a , ..-_— , plant’s outer most layer (Cell Wall) genetic composition as it
{3:33:95 Lac“: 53 relates to the structural make—up and rigidness 0f the cell wall.
I. |_ It has been determined from ground experimentation that the
a * g l I ' 5 structural or physiological continuum of the microtubule
MW- _ i? __ 2H plasma membrane cell wall is the source of stability from
“i ‘55"" 5"" _,,... ' ' various gravitational forces. CWRW Will investigate the
iiﬁ M, [VI microtubule plasma membrane—Cell wall as it relates to the
_ ”If” , _ I - gravitational resistance of the Arabidopsis thaliana.
O 7 ° f ‘ mil Observation of the genes that comprise the cell wall of the
’ 5 Arabidopsis Will be conducted in 1 g and microgravity
‘ | conditions. Upon completion of the investigation, the
_, speeimens’ stems Will be analyzed on the ground for the effects
H i, of 1 g and microgravity conditions. The Arabidopsis thaliana
’ 9k. ‘ 57.5,; - mutates in hyper—gravity conditions With minuet survival
' \ 5 'J U capabilities. In microgravity conditions the mutated specimens
, Q .7»? are expected to gain Viability. Proof of this theory will be
examined by way of the European Modular Cultivation System
.f (EMCS) internal Video recorders, as mutant strains Will be
A developed inside of EMCS. CWRW Will examine four strains
Figure 10. CWRW Hardware. of Arabidopsis, each of Which Will be cultivated in the EMCS
facility in MSG under controlled conditions. Once the
experiment is completed the sample specimens Will be evaluated on earth for Changes in gene Characteristics
responsible for the development of microtubules, plasma membrane, cell walls, and relative phenotypes.
15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"16","The objective of the CW/RW investigation is to analyze the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the
development of supporting tissues (Cell Wall) in earth plants under induced gravitational forces. Ultimately, the
theory that a defined set of cell wall genes contribute to the strength of supporting tissue in plants and that their gene
Characteristics are manipulated by gravity will be evaluated. The results of these investigations will support future
plans to cultivate plants on long—duration exploration missions. CW/RW will be ﬂown to the International Space
Station (188) on Shuttle ﬂight STS—123/lJ/A in February 2008.

IntraVenous F luids GENeration and mixing (I VGEN )19

With NASA’s desire to return to the Moon and to extend manned exploration missions to Mars, there is an
increased likelihood of a mishap and/or medical
emergency. With a focus on minimizing up—mass J 55293ﬁlllfﬁiﬁ'f-‘E-h""3g.""
for exploration missions, it is desirable to have a
system onboard that will produce intravenous ill / ‘5 _ /

(IV) solutions as needed rather than ﬂying large ' 3‘; , / in:

quantities of pre—made IV solutions that have a "" FT’
limited shelf life. IntraVenous ﬂuids GENeration Q ,9, ""7» __j ,9“ g} - MW”
and mixing (IVGEN) is a project whose objective 7 1 ‘ ‘ _ ' N‘W i WI
is to design a compact water purification system Accumulm, 7 u. .° ~ 0/ . lift: z'”
to reliably produce Sterile Water for Injection Assam K9 . i I r: 0' r""- ‘/£ 0

(SW1) and provide a pharmaceutical mixing . g ’ . 1 .3
capability in a reduced gravity environment with mﬁgmlgsm "" i

minimal dependency on spacecraft power

resources. IVGEN will be ﬂown to the ﬁgﬁ‘iﬂﬁgpmwm
International Space Station (188) on Space Shuttle

Endeavour STS—129 (ULF3) currently scheduled .

fOI‘ an August 2009 launch. Flgure 11. IVGEN Hardware.
Columnar-to-Equiaxed T ransition in S OLidification Processes ( CE T SOL )20

CETSOL is a material science investigation from the European Space Agency (ESA) that will study the
formation of the transition from columnar to equiaxed maerostrueture that takes place in castings. This experiment
will take advantage of the microgravity environment on 188 to gather critical benchmark data needed to test
fundamental theories of grain structure formation in solidification processes. The main objective of the
investigation is to significantly improve the integrated modeling of grain structure in industrially important castings.
The CETSOL investigation hardware will be transported to 188 in J anuary 2009 on Shuttle ﬂight STS—128/17A.

IV. MSG’s Role in the International Space Station N ational Laboratory

The 2005 NASA Authorization Act designated the U.S segment of the 188 as a national laboratory and directed
NASA to develop a plan to ""increase the utilization of the 188 by other Federal entities and the private sector. .."" As
the Nation's newest national laboratory, the 188 will further strengthen relationships among NASA, other Federal
entities, and private sector leaders in the pursuit of national priorities for the advancement of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. The 188 National Laboratory will also open new paths for the exploration and
economic development of Space.

1. The National Laboratory concept is an opportunity to expand the US economy in space—based research,
applications and operations.

2. The International Space Station represents a unique and highly Visible national asset with surplus capacity
available for a wide spectrum of applications.

3. NASA will continue to cover cost of operating and maintaining the ISS, and is highly motivated to work

with other agencies and organizations to pursue applications.21
16
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"17","When the ISS Facility reaches assembly complete in the year 2010, over 18 nations Will be involved in the
program. A major step in completing 188 is the launch of ESA’s Columbus Orbiting Facility (COF) in January
2008. The MSG facility Will be one of the first US racks moved to the COP in February 2008. The MSG Will
occupy a US rack location in the COP and Will continue to be integrated and operated as a US resource. At this
time, significant efforts are underway to streamline the integration process for payloads that want to use the US
facilities, including the MSG, on the International Space Station. Most of these efforts center on developing payload
categories With standardized sets of resources. In this approach, the manifesting of payloads on the 188 is similar to
loading cargo on an airplane. The emphasis is placed on standardizing interfaces and utilizing the majority of the
ISS resources With minimal analysis rather than expending an enormous amount of man hours to optimizing all 188
resources. In order to accommodate more payloads, the target integration cycle duration is 6 to 9 months. That is,
from the time a payload is manifested on 188 until it is launched Will be no more than 6 to 9 months. In order to
minimize crew time and crew training requirements, payloads Will be designed to be controlled from the ground by
the scientist. As described in this paper, the MSG facility has tremendous capability for Video observation of
payload operation, containment of hazardous materials, data downlink and storage, and remote commanding of
payload hardware in the MSG work volume. With these unique capabilities, the MSG facility Will be able to
accommodate a Wide variety of national lab payloads.

V. Conclusion

The Mierogravity Science Glovebox (MSG) on the International Space Station (188) has been used for a large
body of research. The MSG has operated on—orbit for more than 3500 hours performing investigations involving
material science, thermal management, protein crystal growth, life sciences, fire detection, combustion, and
technology demonstration. The MSG’s unique design provides two levels of containment to protect the ISS crew
from hazardous operations. Research investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter work
volume, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vde), 1000 watts of cooling
capability, Video and data recording and real time downlink, ground commanding, access to 188 Vacuum Exhaust
and Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is an ideal platform
for space research. Moreover, the MSG provides engineers and scientists a platform for research in an environment
similar to the one that spacecrafts and crew members Will actually experience during space travel and exploration.
In addition, the facility is ideally suited to provide quick, inexpensive access to space for National Lab type
investigations that are necessary to understanding of the role of gravity in the physics associated With new research
areas. Therefore, the MSG facility is a Vital component of NASA’s Vision for a National Laboratory in Space.

VI. Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the members of the MSG Integration Team for their assistance, and review of
this paper. Specifically, Andrew Tygielski, Phillip Bryant, Chris Butler, Jeff Smith, Mark Shelton, and Linda Jeter
provided invaluable information and assistance.

VII. References
1 A. Ostrogorsky, “Solidifieation Using A Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules,” AIAA—2003—l309, 41st Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, Jan. 6—9, 2003
2 Grugel, R., “Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidifieation in a
Mierogravity Environment (PFMI),” NASA Marshall Spaceﬂight Center, Huntsville, AL,
URL: http://eXploration.nasa. gov/p_ro grams/statiorMPFMIhtml
3 Gast, A. P., “Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetie Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE),”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
URL:http_ ://eXp_loration.nasa. gov/p_ro grams/statiorﬂInSPACE .html
4 Voorhees, P., “Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—2 (CSLM—2)”, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
URL: http://eXploration.nasa. gov/p_ro grams/statiorﬂCSLM—2html
5 Urban, D., “Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)”, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
URL: http://eXploration.nasa. gov/p_ro grams/statiomSAMEhtml
6 Hall, N. and McKinley, G., “Shear History Extensional Rheology Experiment (SHERE)”, Glenn Research Center,
Cleveland, OH,
17
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"18","URL: http ://spaeefli ghtsystems. gre .nasa. gOV/Advaneed/IS SResearCh/MS G/ S HERE/
7 Froyen, L. “Combustion Synthesis under Mierogravity Conditions (COSMIC),” Department MTM, KULeuven,
Kasteelpark, Arenberg
8 Dubois, F., “Mierogravity Experiment For the Measurement of Diffusion Coefficients in Crude Oil (DCCO),”
Mierogravity Research Center, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.u1b.aC.be/polyteCerC/Instruments DesigWCCO en.html
9 Kirschhook, C., Kremer S., Martens J ., & Pierre J ., “NANOSLAB,” Centre for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis,
K.U. Leuven, URL: http://WWW.energia.ru/englisWenergia/iss/researehes/teehn—17.html
10 Zegers, 1., & Dubois F., “Protein Microscope for the International Space Station (PromISS),” Vrije Universitiet,
Brussel, Belgium, URL: esamultimedia.esa.int/dOCs/odissea/promiss pr 1004.ppt
11 Legros, J .C., & Barremaeeker L., Heat, Euro Heat Pipes S.A., Nivelles, Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiomSEME2HOXDYD 0.htm1
12 Kroesen, G.M.W., “ARGES—Energy Efficient Lamps for the Future,”, Technical University of Eindhoven,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands, URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiOIUSEM7RWGHZTD 0.html
13 Kim, J ., “Boiling eXperiment Facility,” University of Maryland, College Park, MD,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIJBXF—MABEhtml
14 Cankaya, A., & Arnold W., “Mierogravity Science GlovebOX CFD Model for the Zero Boil—Off Tank
Experiment,” AIAA 2006—1336, 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 9 — 12
J anuary 2006
15 Dreyer, M., The University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany, and M. Weislogel, M. , Portland State University,
Portland, Oregon, Critical Velocities in Open Capillary Channels (CCF)
16 Faeth, G., Smoke Point in Coﬂow Experiment (SPICE), The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
17 Legros, J .,”Seleetable Optics Diagnostics Instrument (SODI),” Mierogravity Research Center
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, URL: http://WWW.esteC.esa.nl/spaeeﬂight/faeilities/diffoil/
18 Kazuhiko, N. and Takayuki, H., “Cell Wall/Reverse Genetic Approach to Exploring Genes Responsible for Cell
Wall Dynamics in Supporting Tissues of Arabidopsis Under Mierogravity Conditions and Resist Wall/Role 0f
Mierotubule—Membrane—Cell Wall Continuum in Gravity Resistance in Plants (CWRW)”, Tohoku University,
Sendai, J apan.
URL: http://Www.nasa.gOV/mission pages/statiomsCienee/experiments/CWRW.html
19Brown, D., “IntraVenous Fluids GENeration and mixing (IVGEN)”, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
20Gandin, C., Billia, B., Zimmermann, G., Browne, D., Dupouy, M., Guillemat, G., Nguyen—Thi, H., Mangelinek—
Noel, N., Reinhart, G., Sturz, L., McFadden, S., Banaszek, J ., Fautrella, Y., Zaidat K., Ciobanas, A., “Columnar—to—
Equiaxed Transition in Solidifieation Processes (CETSOL): a project of the European Space Agency (ESA)
Mierogravity Applications Promotion (MAP) programme”, Materials Science Forum Vol 508 (2006) pp 393—404
21 B. Boen, “International Space Station Overview,”
URL: http://Www.nasa.gOV/mission pages/statiomseienCe/nlab/indeX.html
18
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
