"","x"
"1","44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2006-941
9 - 12 January 2006, Reno, Nevada
The MlcrograVIty Selence Glovebox as a Platform for
Exploratlon Research on the Internatlonal
Space Statlon
Reggie A. Spivey*
TeC-Masters Ina, Huntsville, Alabama, 35806
and
Paul LuzT
NASA Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, Alabama, 35812
The Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) is a double rack facility aboard the
International Space Station ([88) designed for microgravity investigation handling. The
MSG has been operating in the 188 US Laboratory Module since July 2002. The MSG
facility provides an enclosed working area for investigation manipulation and observation in
the 188. The MSG’s unique design provides two levels of containment to protect the [88
crew from hazardous operations. Research investigations operating inside the MSG are
provided a large 255 liter work volume, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply
interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 watts of cooling capability, Video and data
recording and real time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, access to 188 Vacuum
Exhaust and Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. With these
capabilities, the MSG is an ideal platform for research required to advance the technology
readiness levels (TRL) needed for the Crew Exploration Vehicle and the Exploration
Initiative. Areas of research that Will benefit from investigations in the MSG include thermal
management, ﬂuid physics, spacecraft fire safety, materials science, combustion and reacting
control systems, in situ fabrication and repair, and advanced life support technologies. This
paper Will provide a detailed explanation of the MSG facility along with a synopsis of the
research that has already been accomplished in the MSG and an overview of possible MSG
investigations that Will be needed to support the Exploration Initiative.
* SDOS MSG Project Manager, MSFC ISS Payloads Office, VP35, AIAA Member.
T NASA MSG Lead Systems Eng, MSFC Engineering Directorate, EV61, AIAA Lifetime Associate Fellow
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2006 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.
The U.S. Government has a royalty-free license to exercise all rights under the copyright claimed herein for Governmental purposes.
All other rights are reserved by the copyright owner.

"
"2","I. Introduction
The Mierogravity Science GlovebOX (MSG), shown in Fig. 1, is a research facility on—board the International
Space Station (188) in Which fundamental and applied scientific research is conducted that supports NASA’s
Vision for Space Exploration. The unique design of the facility allows it to accommodate science and technology
investigations in a “workbench” type environment. The facility has an enclosed working volume that is held at a
negative pressure With respect to the crew living area. This allows the \7’W)‘\( .57
facility to provide two levels of containment for small parts, particulates, 77: ”“7"" 777-77]
ﬂuids, and gasses. The containment provided by the facility reduces the :/ 4 177737777"".' 7,
safety requirements placed 011 the payload developer and facilitates the ;’§£§7’17 :73 7
development of ﬂight hardware in close parallel with prototype or 7%, “77577” ‘7 . i7 ”
breadboard hardware developed in ground based laboratories. Research ' 7§JW7 77/17\7§’Q /7;77 7
investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter 77 17%"" K L’ V ”'17
work volume, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply interface ""7, 7‘ 7.7%,?”77777 97777
(120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 watts of cooling capability, Video and f ‘ éﬁv:%t 7””,7770 7.
data recording and real time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, ﬁg 17/: :§ 73, 7
access to 188 Vacuum Exhaust and Vacuum Resource Systems, and 7K 777/'/ :.r""-
gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is an ideal ‘7? 7. \7 [7' ’
platform for research required to advance the technology readiness '7 7"" - 3'” 7/, 7 ' ’
levels (TRL) needed for the Crew Exploration Vehicle and the 7 a 36*? M 7%; [/\
Exploration Initiative. In addition, the facility is ideally suited to provide A 73:3'77k. I .7
quick access to space for exploratory type investigations that are i, r .'7: ""\‘O’ég'o’w
necessary to gain an initial understanding of the role of gravity in the ’2': 7
physics associated With new research areas. Figure 1, The MSG Flight Unit With
To facilitate the use of the MSG by the scientific community, an Astronaut Peggy Whitson.
integration team of engineers and support personnel is available at the
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to assist researchers With the complex task of building and operating an
experiment for space. The team advises experiment development groups on engineering issues during the design
phase of their investigation, assists With 188 manifesting and planning, and provides support through the testing and
analysis activities that are required to assure that experiments are compliant With 188 safety and interface
requirements. An engineering unit and development unit is available at MSFC for use during payload development,
verification, and on—orbit operation. A high fidelity training unit is located at the J ohnson Space Center for training
of ISS crew members. Once experiments are transported to the ISS, either by the NASA Shuttle or the Russian
Soyuz 0r Progress vehicles, the crew installs the experiment hardware in the MSG and configures it for operation.
Depending on its design, the actual experiment can be conducted either by the crew or by the ground—based
investigator through two—way real—time data links. Experiment progress can be monitored from the ground through
the several MSG Video cameras, or cameras embedded in the experiment. A teleseience center at MSFC provides
investigators a link to interact With the experiment during ﬂight operations. The investigator can be located at either
MSFC or their home laboratory, Where they are connected Via communication links.
.- "",7"" '1'"" II. Payload Interfaces and Resources Provided by MSG
' .. a 7M 7‘7 :7; The MSG facility is designed to be a versatile platform for space based
7’7.“ ,5"": research. Many of the resources and interfaces found in the MSG are
'2 \‘4 VP 7 7 7‘77 ‘ g 7 compatible With those typically found in a ground based laboratory. Table 1
§ 7‘ 77,77,141 wQO‘ U; 7 7 provides a summary of the resources provided to experiments inside the
71?}. ‘ \u _ 2.. ‘7 = '7 MSG facility. The following paragraphs provide a general over View of the
' ‘ *EQEJ‘ 7 MSG capabilities. Additional detail is available 011 the MSG web site at
\_ 7 “a ' ~:'f http://gloveb0X.mst.nasa.govl.
, 7 ﬂ. ’ A. The MSG Work Volume
’ .7 , 7 '1. 7 The MSG work volume, as shown in Fig. 2 & Fig. 3, provides a large
I m. } 7 ’ i area for set up and operation of experiment hardware. Payloads are loaded
Q . ¢\:;§.W 7 into the work volume Via the 406mm (16 in.) diameter loading ports
Figure 2. The MSG Rack
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","Table 1. MSG Experiment Resource Summary
DESCRIPTION
POWER Three power interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 one 120 V DC, 83 Amp
0 two 28V DC/7 A, i 12V DC/2A, 5V DC/4A
Continuous power allocated to experimenter is a maximum of 1000 watts.
DATA Eight data interfaces are provide in the WV (two 1553 for MLC).
0 two digital (I/O) and analog input lines
0 two RS 422 serial lines
0 one connection to the Ethernet interfaces
0 one RS—422/RS232 feedthrough from the back wall to the front of the rack for
MLC use outside the WV to an investigation inside the WV
0 one user configurable feedthrough at the corner of the front Window.
VIDEO 0 two Sony DSR—V10 DV—CAM digital Video recorders (40 mitﬂtape)
0 two GV—A500 Hi—8 analog Video recorders (240 min/tape)
0 four Hitachi HV—C20 CCD full color cameras
0 two multi—input LCD monitors for crew monitoring,
EXPERIMENT LAPTOP IBM A31p with a 60 gigabyte hard drive and 1 gigabyte of RAM. 1 Ethernet, 1
COMPUTER RS232/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via operating system) interfaces. Windows
2000 (Service Pack 4) Operating System.
STRUCTURAL The WV provides for the attachment of hardware either by M6 inserts or bungee
cords.
0 Cold Plate: 24 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Airlock Top Lid: 18 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Rear Wall: 20 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Access Ports: 27 (each) M6 inserts at 100 pitch
0 Ceiling: Two locations containing 8 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
THERMAL A total of 1000 W can be dissipated from the WV.
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Cold Plate 2 800 W
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Air 2 200 W
VACUUM Two vacuum interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 Vacuum resource/venting is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
0 Vacuum exhaust/waste is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
AIR CIRCULATION 0 Max airﬂow rate of 1200 I/min and a max velocity of 0.044 m/s at the centerline
of the work volume.
0 Airﬂow can be varied between 15% and 100% depending on fan speed settings.
0 Negative pressures of 1.3 InB to at least 7 InB based on facility settings.
AIR FILTERING 0 Three filter banks in series provide WV air filtration. Each bank consists of 8
HEPA filters in parallel (4 front and 4 rear).
0 Particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size
ILLUMINATION Adjustable lighting available up to 1000 LuX incident light measured at the WV
center approximately 200 mm off the WV floor.
containment.
on the right and left sides. Hardware can be mounted to the floor, ceiling, back, and/or sides using M6 threaded
fasteners. An airlock is provided below the work volume Which allows items to be passed into the experiment area
Without compromising containment.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","B. Electrical Power Interfaces

The MSG receives, conditions, and distributes electrical power from the 188 Electrical Power System (EPS) t0
the MSG work volume for use by the investigation. The experiment hardware is provided a maximum of lOOOW of
power. The following primary and secondary supply power interfaces are provided inside the work volume.

,7 1'33 *___7,__,_ 315 . 46 100 - 51 ?E] _ 79
17""“; 1M7}, m, TIE,7.1E17‘ rm 2
SE] 5 2 t 1
93‘ 2 | 2 ”2”"" mm 2 2 g _- l W”
i 2 / f’""” ’F; ”:lti ’7 ""N \i/_;-‘TA—' £11! fir H“ ""A ""\ 3; [$17
‘ ‘ . “ﬁn""; WWW; ‘-‘~. “‘5 “""‘n‘ ‘-‘ “ “ "" ‘- ' ‘.;""-i:;;:"":;£;2;2:l:i;.- £;.;.x};£Wxghp .°;""‘.‘,:;""*‘°;ﬁm' ¥?,- “""*;""° ‘W -‘~"". .
i c E‘Em‘w‘fﬁg‘Eﬂgéﬂ‘gtm‘ﬁmﬁxlmmﬁﬁﬁgﬂ 2. gﬁxiqiffmﬁﬁﬁﬁm .!
2 2 2 2 .22222222 2 22:22:? 22.: .::- ...‘.2.2.‘2.22....- 32.232."" 2' 2 2
2 2 __‘_:i""""‘_""_'::i ’_.__‘.;:“"" r2 2- —1 ' 77 777. ' "" 2
15.6 1 ——@‘l‘——'—$—'/ ""—%ﬁ°— "" Q ‘ ’ ””""""""$;——/ T
. 2 ’ —- . 7"" THT‘éE""'—V# . 2 1? “q A 1. 1—222 EXP DJLET 2” "" !
‘ 7X31};Li/T..4: “ (n) : x .1: ~ 9:. ~. :22
. . ‘12 | (?1 a c @ I? 47’ ‘Qa {D 1) e .. El
§ a : ‘ +453:- -:':’H J lé 3.14 2229 r”.
2 E ‘ ' “x. / .2 232—3 52;
i '31 _‘ :33? {Ly ‘ QR: 7&9 53.5 ,1?
i241 65 ‘1‘: ”L:- ., $2 © © @ (Q -. -- ,Gx‘a 7x22 mm .2""- .
. I2 '9 2 ./r ’32. .2- 1 v \2 2 .
.1 | .275 ' __ CPEV L -UPE‘¢ 2r 2', ,, ""
1 i . """"242 ’ 3 kW” ""-‘2CLU2""“§-iL-é2’ 2.22222 “K 122-220 . -. '1
§ F...""d."".'j . . ‘ ‘rﬁms: f""——:-cs ”231.3 , -|
1 65 ' ’ L"" 'T“@3‘ @ @ @ >© ' ' 33 ""T i
2 , ‘ an ’3 r 2' D ~ ‘
' ‘ ‘ m l, 2‘2‘221 l . .2 c ; é) \7/ \‘:_./’ 1‘22 \""/ —%‘» ‘ |
63.8 ' ‘-_ea 2 9‘ @ @ ©77ﬁ_ - _ e 1313 -
1 '. 229:2 1:25 3 R8225?— CW ’ J12]: 33 7‘
% -2 J.JU‘J — *0.‘ .J.: .. “‘31.“? ' 2
ii 222353 “6:? 222. 3W2‘ 22; “23‘ “.2232
1 a' .2:K§§2@2;22ff§géxal .222i%/é§ 252E @3’@-€2§2’@1 2 '
2 i ""2""!9300‘ P93 ‘2""i.""""@@oO’ £36262 ””2 0,0’ ’62? ""2"" ""'93:. "":6 22.22312‘62 """"1""I""@@;Q§’r’e€2.""2t‘ i ‘
2 1?5 : .‘2‘.§;’«C:? .6532 ﬁfgcg gégﬁ Q 2.2%, .‘ qgﬂltép»; 00%.2: 0 71492-1‘agﬁé9ﬂ $5669.?“ 2 H
2 ‘ i! '2.{$.%9§.2""-22gg.gnk‘iegw2 ""2,2? 6% ”AL; 555 .2 K9525"" 7 '22.635%5gfgéggnbﬁigﬁ-j 1
22222 2 \®&22% E \0&/ 2 y \0 \22/ ../ * \ \®&2/ \9®82€/ 2 2
i . 1.2 :<2+-,21+.:2;£§;~~~222222Eg%*®2 222-«Laura» $1322."", 2—2ééafgm2w9iggi: 2622 m 2
2 =2 - 27:: . 2 2 ’25 22 i ' 2 2 ff???» 2 1
2 > ﬂmm/M 2.32. \—«-/ /22.2\ .2222...» ~
w; ’. 6:7 :gfﬁ'f'aék ‘$§§\¢+jf’t’t?a\.&§9 ""'22 ‘IFI.;'.Ié\ .‘wga ‘ﬁ7;'/G:.\ '.§§4\;:||‘ I2.‘;;""§a\\.gg§§‘\$ﬁ§W.ﬁ§ 5‘; h .
.33 22523.2 3.9232222? 22 2229222? ‘3 ??Hoﬁéw
t 115 1.2-2"" mm (; <2:/>+\“2“@ .uO €2.42,"" ‘ “2% u ,. ~-""""n""‘~"" ( 2222'? 12-13% ( o .2 ewe ( 0 c: 2 ‘
. . L2 . 6 eye 244 2. e, 90 . e .222 m \ﬁg €222. . ea , O! @o 22
% ﬁiﬁw/ TV&A/é. X6223? .. \ss-t “2532/9 $\2‘832/ g. @230224 32
i 1"",: \ﬁ‘ ‘i‘:_3'-::~'-“ v ""-'-t~.—,L-—‘-‘:' ‘ ‘ﬁ/ '\ ‘ “111-533"", “"" 1‘. 2,;-.’-'-"""" / K2 “i‘:r:—_'-.-—’:ﬁ v;_ 7 ""9-1219"": '- '_/‘ 2‘""-\I
i i ""\ . 7, 7, __7777_7-7_777 ,, L, ”J!
17 A7; 71/; 77_ , 77¢ / _ _ 2 *Iv .2 * 24W” Z
46 133 ..
428
Figure 3. MSG Back Wall Layout.
0 Experiment Primary Power
+120 Vdc Power (120 Vdc, 8.3 A)
0 Experiment Secondary Power
28 Vdc Power, (+28 Vdc, 7 A)
+12 Vdc Power, (+12 Vdc, 2 A)
— 12 Vdc Power, (—12 Vdc, 2 A)
5 Vdc Power, (+5 Vdc, 8 A)

Secondary power sources are converted voltages derived from the DC/DC converters in the MSG Facility. To
receive power, experiment hardware must connect to the power supply connectors on the back wall of the work
volume shown in Fig. 3. The primary power connector (J 302) is supplied on a Mil—Spec type connector
MS27656P17F6SA. The experiment must connect to the primary power (120Vdc) with a Mil—Spec type connector
M827467T17F6PA. Secondary power (5, i 12, & 28 Vdc) connectors (J 303/J 325) are supplied on two
M827656P21F118 connectors in the work volume rear wall as shown in Figure 3. Researchers must connect to
secondary power using a connector of type MSZ7467T21F11P.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","C. Data Handling

The MSG data handling system allows for communication With the MSG facility and experiments plus
remote operation of the MSG facility and experiments operating inside the WV. The following interfaces are
provided to experiment hardware in the work volume; MIL—STD—1553B (Via the laptop computer), RS—422 Serial
Interface and Digital Input/Output (I/O) and Analog Input Interface. Investigations are also provided an Ethernet
interface that is directly connected to the, ISS Ethernet.
D. Video Systems

The MSG Video System is provided to observe and record experiment behavior. The MSG Video Drawer
consists of the following: four Video recorders, multi—input LCD monitors, Hitachi HV—C20 CCD full color cameras,
touCh—pad, footswiteh and a headset/mierophone. The Video system has the capability to simultaneously record the
Video signal, display it on the monitors and downlink the Video signal to the ground. Experiments that provide their
own Video cameras must send both Composite and Y/C signals to the MSG Video system. The Composite Video
signal is used to View the camera images on the MSG monitors and for downlinking the Video signal. The MSG
Video recorders require the Y/C Video signal. Playback is possible on all of the recorders.

There are several ways to operate the Video system; it can be commanded from the ground, manually on the
recorder itself or by the use of a touCh—pad. The Video system provides the capability to annotate text onto the Video
signal and has a time counting system that can be recorded on the Video signal and displayed to the operator. The
Video system has time—lapse capability that allows for extended recording time. The time—lapse settings have two
variables that the investigator can Choose from, the length of recording and pause period. The range for the length of
recording is 0.5 to 25.5 seconds increasing in intervals of 1/10 a second, and the range for the pause period is 5 to
255 seconds in intervals of 1—see0nd steps.

There are two types of recorders used in the MSG Video system: two Sony DSR—V10 DV—CAM digital Video
recorders With 40 minutes of recording time per digital tape, and two GV—A500 Hi8MM analog recorders With 240
minutes of recording time per tape. Audio can be recorded simultaneously on all four Video recorders through the
MSG headset/mierophone.

E. Thermal Control Interfaces

The MSG Thermal Control Subsystem (TCS) provides both water cooling and avionics air cooling for
experiment hardware. Water cooling is provided by a 350 mm X 400 mm coldplate embedded in the WV floor. The
coldplate is located on the left side of the work
volume floor and is capable of dissipating 800W NORMAL MODE FLAPPER BANK RECQ/“IQESESSS'ON
under steady state conditions. Experiment PROCESSCONTROL ASSEMBLIES < /
hardware is mounted to the coldplate With M6 VALVES ‘_ a
threaded captive fasteners. Researchers can ' V i
tighten the fasteners as needed to meet their VL'—
thermal requirements but they must not to
exceed 60 in—lbs of torque.

The work volume air Circulation is '
established by the MSG Air Handling Unit
(AHU). The AHU heat exchanger provides 200 REFERENCEDUCT
W of investigation cooling, at an airﬂow rate of
1200 l/min and a maximum velocity of 0.044
m/s at the centerline of the work volume. The ‘
airﬂow can be varied between 15% and 100% I J
depending on fan speed settings. The filtration ilﬁ F
system provides for particulate removal, gm
filtration of single spillage, and oxidation of CO AIRLOCK ”' FELET:ND
to C02 by means of a built—in catalyst. Due to :
the hydroseopie nature of the MSG filters, the DI CHECKVALVE
humidity inside the WV is maintained at or
below the 135 cabin ICVCL Fig- 4 PYOVidCS 8‘ Figure 4. MSG Air Circulation and Filtration.
block diagram of the MSG air flow.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","F. Experiment Laptop Computer

The current laptop provided to MSG experiments is an IBM A3lp With a 60 gigabyte hard drive and l gigabyte
of RAM. The laptop supports dual Ethernet, 1 RSZ32/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via operating system)
interfaces. The operating system is Windows 2000 (Service Pack 4).

Researchers are encouraged to use the server system on the laptop that was developed by the MSG integration
team. The laptop server system is a suite of applications that executes on the MSG Laptop Computer. The purpose
of the laptop server is to abstract the input/output of the system When experiment applications are running and
provide support for various on orbit operations. The laptop server abstracts the 1553B interface, the Serial
(R8232/RS422) connections and the Medium Rate Data Link (Ethernet). Instead of each application developer
spending the time and effort required to get familiar With each of these interfaces, they may concentrate upon their
specific application. The laptop server presents to the applications developer a relatively simple Application
Program Interface (API) that uses the basic Windows system function calls. The laptop server provides a consistent
interface to each application and allows multiple applications to share information through the defined application
interface. The laptop server also provides for extensive ground commanding support (Timelines & Process Control)
to support un—attended operation. All existing interfaces to the laptop have been verified and used in ﬂight so the
risk of having communication problems during on—orbit operations is greatly reduced. Researchers can use a simple
web based system that allows them to issue commands and display experiment sensor measurements Via HTML. By
utilizing the FTP server on the laptop, the experiment can take advantage of the laptop hard drive for storage of data
that can then be down linked using the 188 Medium Rate Data Link. In addition, the laptop provides a socket based
interface to the 1553 data stream for experiment data output.

G. Vacuum Resource/Exhaust and GN2 Subsystem

The MSG is connected to the 188 Vacuum Resource, 188 Vacuum Exhaust, and GN2 subsystems. The
experiment interface to these services is provided inside the WV. The vacuum resource/vent line may be used to
operate a furnace or achieve a course vacuum. The vacuum exhaust/waste gas system is used primarily for venting
gases or byproducts given off by the experiments. However, the quality of the vacuum at the experiment interface
may be lower than the l X 10'3 torr at the MSG interface due to pressure drops in the ducts, quick disconnects etc.
GN2 can be used to inert the internal atmosphere and may provide means for controlling humidity.

The experimenter is provided With quick disconnects at the rear wall of the WV to interface With the vacuum and
GN2 resources. The WV is equipped With manually operated ball valves for the vacuum resource and eXhaust lines
and a needle valve for the GN2 line. There are limitations on the type of gases and materials that can be exhausted
into the ISS vacuum system, and the temperature and pressure of the eXhaust gases. See MSFC—RQMT—2888 for
detailed information on connector types and interface requirements concerning the vacuum and GN2 subsystem.

H. Air Circulation and Filtration

The MSG air Circulation and filtration system is illustrated by Fig 4 and Fig. 5. The MSG Air Handling Unit
(AHU) has three separate fans that draw air from the WV through the filter _
banks and blows this air through the water to air heat exchanger, the Process MSG Flltel‘ Banks
Control Valves and into the Air Discharge Duet, Where the air is re—directed _.
towards the WV. These fans maintain the WV pressure lower than the cabin '1” I ‘1: -
pressure. Any potentially contaminated air can only leave the WV Via the F ﬂ. . _ !
reference outlet following filtration. When the MSG is operating in Normal 7 ff"" -' ' ~ I a
mode, the process control valve is set to allow the air in the WV to be '1: 'j i -"" i' ""'
recirculated through the filters, the fans, the heat exchanger, and back into I F- "" _ ,1 ' '
the WV. In this mode the WV Will maintain a pressure differential of at ! -1 * 1"" “if
least 1.3 mbar between the WV and the outside. When MSG is operating in 1 , _ ""_ .
Sealed mode, the process control valve outlets are sealed off, the fans are '- ﬁn h""
off, and no unfiltered air can leave the WV. This mode is also used for AirIOéRT‘H'”jx' -
experiments not requiring air circulation in the WV. ._.,m \i :

As shown in Fig. 5, the MSG facility has three filter banks. Each filter T“ _ -
bank has a set of four parallel front filters on a front filter plate and a set of r - {1,-
four parallel rear filters on a rear filter plate. The rear filters provide a . ‘f
backup filter system. Each front filter consists of four basic elements
arran ed in a specific order. These is a Wire mesh Which serves as a barrier , ,
for ﬂime propagation, High—Effieieney Particle Air (HEPA) filter elements Flgure 5' MSG Fllter Banks.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","for particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size, an activated carbon element for adsorbing solvents, Chemicals and
gases, and a monolith element for oxidizing combustion products like carbon monoxide. The rear filter is redundant
With the front filter in its ability to filter organic solvents and convert carbon monoxide, there is no HEPA installed
in the rear filters. The MSG air Circulation system can provide up to 200W of cooling.

I. Illumination

Three identical illumination units in the top of the WV provide the illumination of the working area. The three
illumination units combine to provide 1,000 LuX maximum illumination at approximately 200 mm above the center
of the WV ﬂoor. The general illumination is variable in intensity. At the maximum intensity the color temperature is
> 2,750 K, With color rendering index (RA) 0f 85 or better. The Airlock illumination provides 323 LuX general
working light. The illumination units can be switched on and off manually by the crew or remotely from the ground.
J . Airlock

The airlock, shown in Fig. 5, is a bOX—like structure attached to the bottom plate of the WV With an allowable
work area of approximately 26 liters. There is no active thermal conditioning in the airlock. The airlock temperature
is ambient, air Circulation provides conditioning of the airlock atmosphere only. Airlock illumination can be
switched on and off manually or remotely. The airlock front door provides a Lexan Window and a glove port. The
front door can be fully removed for ease of loading investigation hardware With the dimensions of 254mm (10"") by
343 mm (13.5 "") by 299 mm (11.7""). The Airlock top lid in the WV contains 18 M6 inserts on a 70 X 70 mm grid for
threaded fastener hardware mounting. The Airlock top lid can be removed completely and can be locked to create a
leak tight airlock connection. The topside 0f the airlock lid is equipped With a removable handle for the actuation of
the locking mechanism. When the handle is removed a complete ﬂat surface is available for use inside the WV. An
oven—like concept is used inside the airlock to allow for ease in payload transfer from the airlock t0 the WV. The
concept consists of a tray, Which can be placed at two different heights or completely removed from the airlock. The
tray is equipped With seven bungee cords for attaching payloads. The filter used in the airlock is the same type as
used in the WV. Power is not available for experiments inside the airlock. The temperature and humidity of the
Airlock is monitored and is available in the MSG downlink data. Fig. 5 shows the location of the airlock 0n the
bottom right corner of the MSG work volume.

K. Available MSG Facilities

The MSG program hardware consists of an operational Flight Unit on—board the International Space Station, a
high fidelity training unit at the Johnson Space Center (J SC), a ground unit at the Marshall Space Flight Center
(MSFC), and a ﬂight equivalent engineering unit at MSFC. The ground unit is functionally equivalent to the ﬂight
unit and is available to researchers for development testing and fit checks. The engineering unit is identical to the
ﬂight unit and is used to fully verify experiment compatibility prior to ﬂight. In addition, the engineering unit is
available for troubleshooting 0f in—ﬂight anomalies during ﬂight operations. The MSG program also provides
researchers With a ﬂight like A31P laptop computer as resources allow.

A teleseienee center at MSFC provides researchers a link to interact With the experiment during ﬂight operations.
The investigator can be located at either MSFC or their home laboratory, Where they are connected Via
communication links. The entire communication loop from the teleseienee center to the payload in the MSG can be
simulated using the MSG engineering unit and the teleseienee facilities at MSFC. This allows for a thorough Check
out of payload hardware, software, and communication systems prior to ﬂight and affords the researcher a high
degree of confidence that the planned experiment Will be successful in orbit.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","111. Overview of the Research Accomplished in the MSG Facility to Date
To date, the MSG facility has logged over 3000 hours of 0n—0rbit operations processing 14 investigations.
Areas of science that have benefited from experiments in the MSG include, ﬂuid physics, materials science, thermal
control, protein crystal growth, and technology demonstration. The paragraphs that follow contain a brief synopses
0f the investigations that have been performed in the MSG.
A. United States Sponsored Investigations
Solidification Using a Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (S UBSA )1

One of the first materials science experiments on the International Space Station — the Solidification Using a
Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA) investigation was conducted during Expedition 5 inside the Microgravity
Science Glovebox. SUBSA was the first experiment to operate in the MSG facility on the International Space
Station.

The main objective of the SUBSA investigation was to improve science’s understanding of the formation of
semiconductor crystals. Semiconductor crystals are used for many products such as computer Chips, integrated
Circuits, sensors for medical imaging equipment, and detectors of nuclear radiation.

To control the opto—electronic properties of the semiconductor crystals, a small amount of an impurity — named
a dopant — has to be added to the pure semiconductor. Uniform distribution of the dopant in the semiconductor
crystal is essential for production of opto—electronic devices.

For the SUBSA investigation, telluriurn and zinc were used as dopants in an indiurn antimonide sample. The
samples were heated to 850 degrees Celsius and then directionally solidified to form a solid single crystal. The
SUBSA samples were loaded in Clear quartz arnpoules and the SUBSA thermal Chamber had a transparent gradient
zone which allowed the entire process to be captured on Video. Indiurn antimonide was selected because of its low
melting point of around 525 degrees Celsius and because it is useful for creating models that apply to a variety of
semiconductors. During processing, the scientist was able to observe the down linked Video images and command
the furnace from the telescience center at the Marshall Space Flight center to position the solid/liquid interface in the
most optimum position prior to the start of directional solidification. This unique capability, provided by the MSG
facility, allowed the scientist to optimize the investigation real time, and maximize the scientific return.

The SUBSA investigation was setup 0n—0rbit by Astronaut Perry Whitson and completed operation in October
2002 as part of Expedition 5.

T awards Understanding Pore F ormation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidification in a
Microgravity Environment (PFMI)2

The PFMI investigation sought to improve science’s understanding of solidification processes and the effects of
imperfections in the molten material. On Earth when scientists melt metals, bubbles that form in the molten material
can rise to the surface, pop and disappear. In microgravity, the lighter bubbles do not rise and disappear. Prior space
experiments have shown that bubbles often become trapped in the final metal or crystal sample. In the solid, these
bubbles, 0r porosity, are defects that diminish both the material’s strength and usefulness.

The Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation melted samples of a transparent modeling material,
succinonitrile (SCN) and succinonitrile water mixtures. The transparent material allowed scientists to observe how
bubbles form in the samples and study their movements and interactions.

The PFMI experiments heated the SCN samples to approximately 120 degrees Celisus and directionally
solidified them at translation velocities of 0.5 micrometers per second up to 10 micrometers per second. Two
cameras were used to collect real—time images of the samples as they were melted and subsequently resolidified in
the thermal Chamber.

Images were sent to the investigator on the ground working in the telescience center at Marshall Space Flight
Center. The investigator manipulated the investigation by sending commands to Change temperatures, growth rates
and other variables that affected sample processing.

The PFMI investigation has processed over 20 samples in orbit and continues to operate on board 188 at this
time.

Investigating the Structure ofParamagnetic Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE)3

The InSPACE investigation examined the way small magnetic particles interacted with the complex properties
found in magnetorheological ﬂuids. Magnetorheological (MR) ﬂuids are a Class of ""smart "" materials capable of
providing a rapid, controllable response when a magnetic field is applied. The low—graVity International Space

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","Station environment allowed research on particle interaction without the effects of sedimentation. An objective of
the InSPACE investigation was to determine the true three—dimensional low—energy structure of a MR emulsion in a
pulsed magnetic field. The InSPACE investigation Visually studied the final, fine structure of the MR ﬂuid in a
pulsed magnetic field. This study helped researchers understand the competing forces that govern the final shape of
the structures.

The InSPACE hardware consisted of five major parts: the Helmholtz coil assembly containing the sealed Vial
that holds the MR ﬂuid; an optics assembly with two long working—distanee lenses, cameras, and base plate; an
aVionies assembly containing two displays, a square—wave generator, and the power distribution box; the light source
assembly; and three Video recorders, which are part of the MicrograVity Science Glovebox (MSG). The crew inserts
the coil assemblies into the optics plate. The square—wave generator then sends pulsed power input along the
Helmholtz coil, generating a magnetic field in the ﬂuid. The cameras, equipped with microscopic lenses, record the
activities of the ﬂuid mierostruetures with and without the magnetic field.

InSPACE was operated by Astronaut Don Pettit as part of Expedition 6.

Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures-Z (CSLM-2)4

CSLM—2 is a materials science experiment designed to study the rate at which particles of tin suspended in a
liquid comprised of molten tin/lead alloy, increase in size, a process called coarsening.

CSLM—2 used the microgravity environment on the 188 to prevent the tin particles from rising to the top of the
mixture as well as to eliminate convection in the tirﬂlead mixture, which can inﬂuence coarsening.

In any mixture that contains particles of different sizes, the large particles tend to grow while the smaller
particles shrink in a process called coarsening. Tiny oil droplets coalescing into a large blob are one illustration, but
the process occurs in solids as well. Coarsening occurs on Earth during the processing of any metal alloy and thus
the coarsening process affects products from dental fillings to turbine blades. Since the properties of an alloy are
linked to the size of the particles within the solid, coarsening can be used to strengthen materials. This is the ease
with the majority of aluminum alloys used commercially today. Conversely, if the coarsening process proceeds too
long the material can weaken. This occurs in jet turbine blades and is one of the reasons why turbine blades must be
replaced after a certain number of hours of service. Thus developing accurate models of the coarsening process is
central to creating a wide range of new materials from those used in automobiles to those used in space applications.
The results of previous experiments performed on the Shuttle have done just that. These models have been
incorporated into a computer code that is being used to design many new materials, including materials of
importance to NASA's spaceﬂight program. Solid—liquid systems are ideal systems to study this coarsening process.
However, gravity can induce particle sedimentation and thus hamper the studies of coarsening in these mixtures on
Earth.

The CSLM—2 investigation intended to use the microgravity environment of the Space Station to study the
process of coarsening with reduced interference from the sedimentation that occurs on Earth. However, due to the
Columbia disaster, samples from CSLM—2, were not able to be returned to Earth in time for evaluating the results.
Although the data was lost, engineering data collected on equipment function can benefit subsequent experiments.

B. European Space Agency Sponsored Investigations

Since the inception of the MSG program, ESA has developed and operated eight successful investigations in the
MSG facility. Four experiments were developed by BSA as part of the Belgian TaXi Flight (BTF). The
investigations included COSMIC, DCCO, Nanoslab, and PromISS—l. This series of experiments were a part of the
science research activities performed in November 2002 aboard the 188 by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of
Belgian nationality. Nanoslab encountered technical difficulties and was not able to complete all of the scientific
objectives.

In October 2003, Spanish astronaut, Pedro Duque, performed MSG investigations Nanoslab and PromISS—2 as
part of the Spanish Soyuz Mission. The Nanoslab investigation was a follow on to the Nanoslab investigation that
encountered technical difficulties during the Belgian TaXi Flight. Duque spent eight days aboard the Space Station
conducting science experiments under a commercial contract between BSA and the Russian Aviation and Space
Agency.

In April 2004, MSG investigations HEAT and ARGES were operated as part of the Dutch Soyuz Mission. The
experiments were performed by Dutch ESA cosmonaut / astronaut Andre Kuipers who was launched to 188 from the
Russian launch site Baikonur on April 19th, 2004.

A 30 day PromISS—3 investigation was performed in January and February of 2004. Other PromISS
investigations are planned for future operations in the MSG. This illustrates the usefulness of the MSG facility. The
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","primary investigation hardware remains on—board and future investigations require relatively little up mass to deliver
new samples for follow on experiments.

The following paragraphs provide a brief summary explanation of these ESA investigations. For more detailed
information concerning these investigations, please refer to the European Space Agency web page at
http_://www.esa.int.

Combustion Synthesis under Microgravity Conditions ( COSMI C )5

COSMIC studied mierostructure formation of compressed powder samples (in casu Ti—Al—B) during self—
propagating high—temperature combustion processes (SHS). The main scientific objective was the investigation of
the relationship between general physiCO—Chemical mechanisms of combustion and formation of the microstructure
and composition fields. The COSMIC experiment was a part of the science research activities performed aboard the
188 by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of Belgian nationality in the frame of the ODISSEA Project. The European
Space Agency and Belgian Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs (OSTC) were responsible
for preparation and implementation of the scientific program.

Microgravity Experiment For the Measurement ofDiffusion Coefﬁcients in Crude Oil (DCC0)6

This research program aims to investigate the isothermal diffusion and the Soret effect (thermodiffusion). The
scientific community and petroleum industries have a great interest in the accurate measurements of diffusion and
Soret coefficients. The DCCO experiment objective was to measure diffusion coefficients of ternary mixtures of
organic compounds. The experimental data set included different liquid mixture mass fractions. The mixtures were
composed of n—dodeeane, tetrahydronaphthalene and isobutylbenzene that are compounds representative of the
crude oil Chemical families. The principle was to introduce liquid A into a column of the ternary mixture B by
removal of a slider gate. During the three to five hours—eXpeCted diffusion duration, the process was monitored with
a dual wavelength MaCh—Zehnder interferometer, measuring the Change in refractive index induced by concentration
gradients. From the resulting interferograms recorded on a photo camera, the concentration gradients are derived as
a function of time. The DCCO experiment was performed by Belgian astronaut Frank de Winne as part of the
Belgian TaXi Flight.

NANOSLAB7

NANOSLAB is physical sciences investigation involving zeolites. Zeolites are crystal formations with
structured spaces or pores that allow them to absorb or hold onto other materials such as water. The NANOSLAB
research has significance in areas including the petrochemical industry. The aim of this experiment is to try and
create more effective zeolite crystal structures by mixing different zeolite solutions with a range of erystal—forming
catalysts. The NANOSLAB experiment was conducted by Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque as part of the Spanish
Soyuz Mission.

Protein Microscope for the International Space Station (PromISS-1,2 & 3 )8

The PromISS investigations are a study of the crystallization of proteins in microgravity conditions. These
investigations seek to provide information that will lead to a better understanding of the fundamental processes
underlying the protein crystallization process. The major objective of the experiments is to produce a detailed
analysis and quantitative interpretation of the relationship between the quality of the crystals and the environment in
which they were produced. The obj eetives are to:

0 Further evaluate the effect of microgravity 0n crystal quality, as compared to experiments in gel.
0 Confirm that the removal of convection by the use of gels has a similar effect as microgravity
0 Quantify the relationship between position of growth of the crystal and crystal quality.

The PromISS investigation uses a Digital Holography Microscope to analyze the crystallization process. The
PromISS—l experiment was performed during the Belgian TaXi Flight in November 2002. Preliminary results
obtained show that the instrument was strongly affected by Vibrations and the temperature profile of the mission.
These factors had a bad impact on the quality of the results obtained.

An upgraded version of the PromISS—l hardware, called PROMISS—2 was uploaded with Progress HP in August
2003 and operated as part of the Spanish Soyuz Mission (SSM). SiX PROMISS experiment cells were uploaded
with the Soyuz 7S, analysed with the PROMISS—2 optical diagnostic hardware over 10 days, and downloaded with
the Soyuz 68.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","The PromISS—3 experiment was a re—ﬂight of the previous PromISS—Z experiment performed during the Spanish
Soyuz Mission, but with an investigation of the experimental cells in the Digital Holography Microscope of 30 days.
After the 30 day processing, the samples were stowed in an incubator (AQUARIUS) for 2 months, and then returned
on Soyuz 88. The PromISS—3 experiment is an adaptation of a digital holography instrument developed by ULB—
MRC for the observation of counter—diffusion experiments in microgravity. This instrument provided a View of the
crystallization reactions in terms of density gradients in the solution and of the localization of the crystals. The
observation of the density gradients should make it possible to evaluate models of the diffusion and residual
convection in the crystallization process. This information, together with the localization of the crystals, and the
observation of the timing of their growth, can allow the identification of the growth conditions of the crystals. This
information can then be related to crystal quality and internal order.

Heat transfer performance ofa grooved heat pipe (Heat)9

Heat was an investigation of the effectiveness of grooved heat pipes in the weightlessness of space. The main
aims of this technology demonstration were ;

0 The characterization of the heat transfer performance of a grooved heat pipe in weightlessness, by measuring the
maximum rate of heat ﬂow sustainable in three different modes:

— Anti—parallel heating/cooling (i.e. heating from one side of the pipe then cooling from opposite side).

— Mixed heating/cooling conditions (i.e. heating from two sides of the pipe then cooling from one of these sides)
0 The validation of the existing mathematical model that is used to evaluate the performances of new heat pipes.

0 To prove that the grooved heat pipe design can cope with the formation and trapping of vapor bubbles in the
pipe. A build up of vapor on the inner surface of a pipe creates an insulating layer, which reduces the pipes
effectiveness to transfer heat.

The Heat investigation was performed in April 2004 as part of the Dutch Soyuz Mission.

ARGES Investigation -- Energy efﬁcient lamps for the future”

The ARGES investigation sought to improve the understanding of High—Intensity Discharge (HID) lamps and
how they are affected by imperfections. The ARGES experiment examined these HID lamps in the microgravity
environment of the International Space Station.

The ceramic container of a HID lamp holds several metal gasses, sealed under high pressure. If a powerful
electrical current runs through the gaseous content, the metal atoms in the gas pick up energy and radiate light.
However, over time the gaseous contents begin to de—rniX or separate away from each other. As a consequence not
every part of the lamp has an equivalent amount of energy to transfer into light.

Instable plasma channels and de—rnixed gasses are the two biggest problems in HID lamps. Therefore, the main
objectives of the ARGES experiment were to determine, which factors were causing these two problems. To do this,
the ARGES investigation employed a high—resolution emission spectrometer to analyze a series of individually
lighted HID lamps. Each light—producing gas in the HID has its own spectrum. The emission spectrometer was used
to determine, which gases were present in small areas within the lamp.

Like the Heat investigation, the ARGES investigation was performed in April 2004 as part of the Dutch Soyuz
Mission.

IV. Future MSG Investigations

The many capabilities of the MSG detailed in this paper, make it an ideal platform for research required to
advance the technology readiness levels (TRL) needed for the Crew Exploration Vehicle and the Exploration
Initiative. Related areas of research that will benefit from investigations in the MSG include combustion, ﬂuids
physics, thermal control, fire suppression and detection, in situ fabrication and repair, material science, and life
sciences. Investigations currently planned for operation in the MSG include BXF, SAME, ZBOT, SODI, MFEU,
and Micro Fluidic. The following paragraphs provide and brief overview of MSG investigations that are planned for
operation in the next two years along with some suggestions for other future MSG investigations.

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","A. Investigations Planned for N ear Term Operation in the MSG Facility
Boiling eXperiment F acility (BXF)H

The BXF investigation Will obtain data needed to understand the process involved With boiling in gravity and
microgravity. The research should enable the development of more efficient cooling systems on future spacecraft
and on Earth.

Boiling efficiently removes large amounts of heat by generating vapor from liquid. It is being used in electric
power plants, electronic cooling and purification and separation of Chemical mixtures. An upper limit, called the
critical heat ﬂuX, eXists Where the heater is covered With so much vapor that liquid supply to the heater begins to
decrease. Supplying constant power above this limit for prolonged periods can increase the heater temperature to the
point whereby the heater is destroyed. Determination of critical heat ﬂuX in microgravity is essential for designing
cooling systems for space. Therefore, boiling is being studied to increase the effectiveness of cooling in space.

The Boiling eXperiment Facility (BXF) Will house two separate investigations, BXF—MABE and BXF—NPBX.
The purpose of the BXF is to validate models being developed for heat transfer coefficients, critical heat ﬂuX and
the pool boiling curves.

Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)12

The SAME investigation is being developed by the NASA Glenn Research Center, ZIN Technologies, and the
National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST). The SAME experiment is designed to determine the
particle size distributions of the smokes generated from a variety of overheated spacecraft materials and from
microgravity fires. The objective is to provide the data that spacecraft designers need to properly design and
implement fire detection in spacecraft. This investigation Will also evaluate the performance of the smoke detectors
currently in use aboard the space shuttle and 188 for the test materials in a microgravity environment.

Zero Boil- Off T ank Experiment (ZBOT)13

The ZBOT investigation will improve the scientific understanding of the storage of cryogenic ﬂuids in low
gravity conditions. Effective, affordable, and reliable cryogenic ﬂuid storage is essential for propellant and life
support systems on interplanetary spacecraft. The Zero—Boil—Off (ZBO) approach is an innovative means of
controlling storage tank pressure by eliminating tank self—pressurization through a synergetic application of passive
multilayer insulation, an active heat removal system, and a forced mixing mechanism. ZBOT will result in design
guides for cryogenic ﬂuid storage tanks and a database of microgravity ﬂuid management data for specific in—orbit
or on surface applications. The end goal is to deliver cost—effective, reliable, and enabling design concepts for long—
term storage of cryogenic ﬂuids used in life support and propulsion.

The technology to be developed applies equally to short duration (50—100) day storage applications for the
envisioned 2010—2015 missions to the earth’s neighborhood and to long duration 100—1000 days interplanetary
missions beyond 2015. Consequently ZBOT Will encompass both microgravity storage in low and high earth orbit
and reduced gravity storage on the lunar, Martian or other planetary surfaces.

Selectable Optics Diagnostics Instrument (SODI)14

The SODI hardware is being designed by the European Space Agency (ESA) to operate in the MSG facility and
accommodate the Diffusion and Soret Coefficients (DSC) measurement investigation, the Inﬂuence of Vibration 0n
Diffusion in Liquids (IVIDIL) investigation, and the Aggregation of Colloidal Solutions (COLLOID) investigation.
The objective of this series of investigations is to;

0 Study diffusion and Soret phenomena and measurement of these coefficients in multi—component mixtures
(liquids).

0 Study the inﬂuence of controlled Vibration stimuli on these diffusion processes.

0 Study the aggregation (clustering) of colloidal solutions.

The instrumentation Will employ several optical diagnostic methods including;

0 Mach Zehnder interferometry (M21)

0 Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM)

0 Near Field Scattering (NFS)

0 Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV)

0 Photogrammetry (PM)

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","These methods will be used to analyze a selection of liquids and gases in the microgravity environment.
Magnetic F luids Experiment Unit (MFE U )15

The MFEU investigation is designed to study heat and mass transfer phenomena in suspensions of magnetic
nanoparticles under the inﬂuence of variable temperature gradients and magnetic fields on different geometries. The
experiments will involve liquid ferroﬂuids in a cylindrical gap. The ferroﬂuids will be exposed to controlled
magnetic fields provided by toroidal coils. Cylindrical internal and external water heat exchangers will provide
temperature differences in the radial direction while the surface temperature at the outside wall of the magnetic ﬂuid
layer will be maintained constant. Temperature gradients will be measured by thermistors and optical observation of
a temperature sensitive liquid crystal layer.

MicroFluidic Light Experiment“

This ESA developed investigation will test the use of innovative micro ﬂuidiC devices which are the core
element of miniaturized medical diagnostic systems. The experiment will involve a series of miero—ﬂuidie Chips in a
light box that will be attached to one of the MSG cameras. Each of the Chips will be injected with a photoshate
buffer saline ﬂuid with suspensions of ﬂuorescent polystyrene micro beads. The MSG cameras will be used to
observe transport of ﬂuid through the Chip by capillary forces. Images will be saved on the MSG laptop computer
and down linked to the science team on the ground.

B. Other Potential Exploration Related Investigations that can be Accommodated by The MSG Facility

When President Bush announced a New Vision for Space Exploration on J anuary 4, 2004, he said:

“Research on board the station and here on Earth will help us better understand and overcome the obstacles that limit
exploration. Through these efforts we will develop the skills and techniques necessary to sustain further space
exploration.”

As the President mentioned in this quote, our knowledge of key technologies must be improved if we are to meet
NASA’s current exploration goals. To do this, we must perform research in an environment similar to the one that
our spacecrafts and crew members will actually experience during space travel. As discussed in this paper, the MSG
facility is a very capable and versatile resource that is available in the microgravity environment on the International
Space Station to perform this type of research. Much of the work needed to advance key technologies is already
underway. In fact, Appendix A provides a list of papers, published at the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting
and Exhibit in January 2006, involving analytical techniques and technologies that could possibly benefit by
performing experiments in the MSG facility on—orbit. The authors of this paper wish to encourage all Scientist and
Engineers who are performing research in the Space environment to make an investigation in the MSG facility a part
of their development plan.

V. Conclusion

The Mierogravity Science Glovebox (MSG) on the International Space Station (188) has been used for a large
body or research. The MSG has operated on—orbit for more than 3000 hours performing investigations involving
material science, thermal management, protein crystal growth, life sciences, and technology demonstration. The
MSG’s unique design provides two levels of containment to protect the ISS crew from hazardous operations.
Research investigations operating inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter work volume, 1000 watts of dc
power Via a versatile supply interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 watts of cooling capability, Video and data
recording and real time downlink, ground commanding, access to 188 Vacuum EXhaust and Vacuum Resource
Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is an ideal platform for space exploration
related research. Moreover, the MSG provides engineers and scientists a platform for research in an environment
similar to the one that spacecrafts and crew members will actually experience during space travel and exploration.
In addition, the facility is ideally suited to provide quick, inexpensive access to space for exploratory type
investigations that are necessary to gain an initial understanding of the role of gravity in the physics associated with
new research areas. Therefore, the MSG facility is a Vital component of NASA’s Vision for space exploration.

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","VI. Appendix A:
Papers, Published at the 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Involving Analytical
Techniques and Technologies that could Possibly Benefit from Performing Experiments in the MSG Facility
On-orbit.
A. Thermal Management in Aerospace Systems
AIAA—2006—0596
Variable— Gravity Effects on a Single— Phase Partially—Confined Spray Cooling System
K. Yerkes, US. Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright—Patterson AFB, OH
B. Microgravity Fluid Physics Research and Technology
AIAA—2006—O737
Investigation of TWO Phase Flows in Microgravity Using Ground Based Experiments
S. Vasavada, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
AIAA—2006—O738
Dynamics of Evaporating Films in Reduced Gravity
S. Padate, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI
AIAA—2006—1527
Experimental Investigation of Electrohydrodynamic Pumping Feasibility in the Microgravity Condition Through
Conduction Phenomenon
R. Mahmoudi, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran
AIAA—2006—O733
Miscible Fluids in Microgravity (MFMG)
J . Pojman, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS
C. Spacecraft Fire Safety and Microgravity Combustion
AIAA—2006—O744
Extinguishment 0f Partially Premixed Flames in Normaland Microgravity With Applications to Fire Safety
A. Lock, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
AIAA—2006—0746
Transient Measurements of Radiation, Temperature and Soot in Spherical Microgravity Diffusion Flames
M. Chernovsky, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
AIAA—2006—0747
Radiative Extinction 0f Gaseous Spherical Diffusion Flames in Microgravity
K. Santa, University of Hawaii, Manoa, HI
D. Vision for Space Exploration / Reviews of Research and Technology
AIAA—2006—O936
A Numerical Study of Tank Pressure Control in Reduced Gravity
S. Barsi, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
AIAA—2006—O937
Simulation and Prediction of J et Induced Geyser Formation in Microgravity Propellant Tanks
J . Marchetta, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","E. Microgravity Materials Science and Technology
AIAA—2006—1 138 Kinematic Effects on Interface Behavior of Solution System for Crystal Growth Under
Microgravity
L. Chien, Chienkuo Technology University, Changhwa, Taiwan (roc)
AIAA—2006—1 139 Miniature Arcs for Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes in Microgravity
J . Alford, TDA Research Inc., Wheat Ridge , CO
AIAA—2006—1 141 Late— Stage Capillarity Effects During Crystallite Melting in Microgravity
M. Glicksman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY
AIAA—2006—1 144
Effect of Weightlessness 0n the Application of Bolt Tightening — A Student KC— 135 Flight Experiment
A. Boyer, University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL
AIAA—2006—1 145 Contamination of Microgravity Liquid Diffusivity Measurements by Void—Generated
Thermocapillary Convection
I Alexander, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
F. Combustion and Reacting Systems
AIAA—2006—1 135
Experimental Study of Acoustically— Forced J et Flames Under LOW- and Normal— Gravity Conditions
M. Gamba, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
G. Advanced Life Support Technologies for Exploration
AIAA—2006—1529
Performance Testing of Liquid Pumps and Gas—Liquid Phase Separators Undergoing Gas Ingestion in LOW Gravity
H. Nahra, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
AIAA—2006—1336
Microgravity Science Glovebox CFD Model for the Zero Boil— Off Tank Experiment
A. Cankaya, NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH
AIAA—2006—1337
Porous Media Condensing Heat Exchanger With Integral Gas Liquid Separation for
Space Flight Use
D. Althausen, ZIN Technologies, Brook Park, OH
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"16","VII. Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the members of the MSG Integration Team for their assistance, and review of
this paper. Specifically, Linda J eter, Andrew Tygielski, Phillip Bryant, Chris Butler, J eff Smith, Mike Penton, and
Frankie J ernigan provided invaluable information and assistance.

VIII. References
1 A. Ostrogorsky, “Solidifieation Using A Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules,” AIAA—2003—1309, 4lst Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, J an. 6—9, 2003
2 Grugel, R., “Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidifieation in a
Mierogravity Environment (PFMI),” NASA Marshall Spaceﬂight Center, Huntsville, AL,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIMPFMIhtml
3 Gast, A. P., “Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetie Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE),”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
URLzhttp ://eXplorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiomInSPACE .html
4 Voorhees, P., “Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—2 (CSLM—2)”, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiorﬂCSLM—2html
5 Froyen, L. “Combustion Synthesis under Mierogravity Conditions (COSMIC),” Department MTM, KULeuven,
Kasteelpark, Arenberg
6 Dubois, F., “Mierogravity Experiment For the Measurement of Diffusion Coefficients in Crude Oil (DCCO),”
Mierogravity Research Center, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.u1b.aC.be/polyteeiﬂer/Instruments DesigWCCO en.html
7 Kirschhook, C., Kremer S., Martens J ., & Pierre J ., “NANOSLAB,” Centre for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis,
K.U. Leuven, URL: http://WWW.energia.ru/englisivenergia/iss/researehes/teehn—17.html
8 Zegers, 1., & Dubois F., “Protein Microscope for the International Space Station (PromISS),” Vrije Universitiet,
Brussel, Belgium, URL: esamultimedia.esa.int/dOCs/odissea/promiss pr 1004.ppt
9 Legros, J .C., & Barremaeeker L., Heat, Euro Heat Pipes S.A., Nivelles, Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiomSEME2HOXDYD 0.htm1
10 Kroesen, G.M.W., “ARGES—Energy Efficient Lamps for the Future,”, Technical University of Eindhoven,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands, URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiOIUSEM7RWGHZTD 0.html
11 Kim, J ., “Boiling eXperiment Facility,” University of Maryland, College Park, MD,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIJBXF—MABEhtml
12 Urban, D., “Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)”, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiomSAMEhtml
13 Cankaya, A., & Arnold W., “Mierogravity Science GlovebOX CFD Model for the Zero Boil—Off Tank
Experiment,” AIAA 2006—1336, 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 9 — 12
J anuary 2006
14 Legros, J .,”Seleetable Optics Diagnostics Instrument (SODI),” Mierogravity Research Center
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, URL: http://WWW.esteC.esa.nl/spaeeﬂight/faeilities/diffoil/
15 Odenbaeh, 8., “Magnetic Fluids Experiment Unit (MFEU),” University/ZARM Bremen, Bremen, Germany,
16 Lippi, E., “MieroFluidie Light Experiment,” European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC),
Noordwijk, The Netherlands
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
