"","x"
"1","IAC-08-A2.6.B1
AN OVERVIEW OF THE MICROGRAVITY SCIENCE GLOVEBOX
(MSG) FACILITY, AND THE GRAVITY-DEPENDENT PHENOMENA
RESEARCH PERFORMED IN THE MSG ON THE INTERNATIONAL
SPACE STATION (ISS)
Author: Mr. Reggie Spivey
Tec-Masters, Ina, Huntsville, AL, United States, reggie.a.spivey@nasa.g0v
CO-Author: Mr. Kenneth B. Morris
NASA Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL, United States, bruce.m0rris@nasa.g0v
ABSTRACT
The Mierogravity Science GlovebOX (MSG) is a double rack facility aboard the International
Space Station (188) designed for gravity-dependent phenomena investigation handling. The
MSG has been Operating on the 188 since July 2002 and is currently located in the Columbus
Laboratory Module. The unique design of the facility allows it to accommodate science and
technology investigations in a “workbench” type environment. The facility has an enclosed
working volume that is held at a negative pressure with respect to the crew living area. This
allows the facility to provide two levels of containment for small parts, particulates, ﬂuids, and
gases. This containment approach protects the crew from possible hazardous Operations that take
place inside the MSG work volume. Research investigations Operating inside the MSG are
provided a large 255 liter enclosed work space, 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile supply
interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vde), 1000 watts of cooling capability, Video and data recording
and real time downlink, ground commanding capabilities, access to 188 Vacuum Exhaust and
Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen supply. With these capabilities, the MSG is an
ideal platform for fundamental science investigations and research required to advance the
technology readiness levels (TRL) needed for the Orion crew exploration vehicle. Areas Of
research that benefit from investigations in the MSG include thermal management, ﬂuid physics,
spacecraft fire safety, materials science, combustion and reacting control systems, in situ
fabrication and repair, plant growth, and advanced life support technologies. This paper will
provide a detailed explanation of the MSG facility, a synopsis of the research that has already
been accomplished in the MSG, and an overview of future investigations currently planned for
Operation in the MSG. In addition, this paper will address the role of the MSG facility in the 188
National Lab.
1

"
"2","Introduction (ESA) Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), or the
Japanese H—II Transfer Vehicle (HTV), the crew
installs the experiment V‘s /.. Kt gay M.
The Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG), hardware in the .MSG 7-331 4"" .:;“¥.fm’g{
shown in Fig. 1, is a research facility on—board and eonfigures It for ' ‘11“ H ""7,???” {t
the International Space Station (188) in which operation. Depending ,5, ’la‘eﬁh"", ‘ ‘ t i 5‘7 E
fundamental and applied scientific research is on Its design, the {'5'- ‘3‘1‘; . 4161/” ”W 1;,5'
conducted. The unique design of the facility allows it actual experiment can 97.- tlt t '17 ?ft‘ w.
to accommodate science and technology be conducted either by L: ’7 if. Kt 5555 {r
investigations in a “workbench” type environment. the crew or by the ’7', “4 it'l‘mwv jet,
The facility has an enclosed working volume that is greehe'based “:2 e Egg; $5: i ,1 ”I Qt?”
held at a negative pressure With respect to the crew investigator throagh 711' thus: “ K}; 5“;
living area. This allows the facility to provide two two—way real—time ta; «m 9"" ':3 ,t ’
levels of containment for small parts, particulates, data/cemmand hhks' W \ I :u/J’
ﬂuids, and gasses. The containment provided by the Experiment. progress 5“ t t
facility reduces the safety requirements placed on the can be monitored from :45; 4' sx®~ﬂ 1 ’t/\
payload developer and facilitates the development of the ground through the ’"" .33 9',3\ .-
ﬂight hardware in close parallel With prototype or several MSG Vldee "" ” n 5:. \é‘av‘? .‘ ,. -
breadboard hardware developed in ground based cameras, or .cameras ‘3‘“ 7:» {><—
laboratories. Research investigations operating embetlded m the Figure 2, The MSG Flight Unit
inside the MSG are provided a large 255 liter Work experiment. A With Astronaut Peggy Whitson.
Volume (WV), 1000 watts of dc power Via a versatile telesc1ence .center at. . . .
supply interface (120, 28, i 12, and 5 Vdc), 1000 MSFC protrides investigatorsa link to interact With
watts of cooling capability, Video and data recording the experiment during hlght operations. The
and real time downlink, ground commanding investigator can be located at either MSFC or their
capabilities, access to 188 Vacuum Exhaust and home theoretery’ where they are connected V13
Vacuum Resource Systems, and gaseous nitrogen communication hhks'
supply. With these capabilities, the MSG facility is
ideally suited to provide quick access to space for 1- Payload Interfaces and Resources
investigations that are necessary to gain an initial Provided by MSG
understanding 0f the role 0f gravity ih the physics The MSG facility is designed to be a versatile
associated With space research. platform for space based research. Many of the
Once experiments are transported to the ISS, resources and interfaces found in the MSG are
either by the NASA Shuttle, the Russian SOYUZ or compatible with those typically found in a ground
Progress vehicles, the European Space Agency’s based laboratory. Table 1 provides a summary of the
resources provided to experiments inside the MSG
1'"" facility. The following paragraphs provide a general
.7: l’.} 2- over View of the MSG capabilities. Additional detail
7 ’ 7 -.: W is available on the MSG web site at
7 "" ”Fa“: f?"" http://msg10veb0X.mst.nasa.g0V.
N; 1.6V ‘ {g t A. The MSG Work Volume
3’"" \q A et- , I The MSG work volume, as shown in Fig. 2 &
""9 i V” ‘ ?yti, Fig. 3, provides a large area for set up and operation
' h 4 5. of experiment hardware. Payloads are loaded into the
‘_ ‘, ?_x work volume Via the 406mm (16 in.) diameter
1‘ Mt t loading ports on the right and left sides. Hardware
7 t , » ‘4 ‘7 g [ I can be mounted to the ﬂoor, ceiling, back, and/or
‘ 0 ;Jg\g ( sides using M6 threaded fasteners.
*‘
Figure 1. The MSG Rack
2

"
"3","Table 1. MSG Experiment Resource Summary
DESCRIPTION
POWER Three power interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 one 120 V DC, 83 Amp
0 two 28V DC/7 A, i 12V DC/2A, 5V DC/4A
Continuous power allocated to experimenter is a maximum of 1000 watts.
DATA Eight data interfaces are provide in the WV (two 1553 for MLC).
0 two digital (I/O) and analog input lines
0 two RS 422 serial lines
0 one connection to the Ethernet interfaces
0 one RS—422/RS232 feedthrough from the back wall to the front of the rack for
MLC use outside the WV to an investigation inside the WV
0 one user configurable feedthrough at the corner of the front Window.
VIDEO 0 two Sony DSR—V10 DV—CAM digital Video recorders (40 mitﬂtape)
0 two GV—A500 Hi—8 analog Video recorders (240 min/tape)
0 four Hitachi HV—C20 CCD full color cameras
0 two multi—input LCD monitors for crew monitoring,
EXPERIMENT LAPTOP IBM A31p with a 60 gigabyte hard drive and 1 gigabyte of RAM. 1 Ethernet, 1
COMPUTER RS232/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via operating system) interfaces. Windows
2000 (Service Pack 4) Operating System.
STRUCTURAL The WV provides for the attachment of hardware either by M6 inserts or bungee
cords.
0 Cold Plate: 24 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Airlock Top Lid: 18 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Rear Wall: 20 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
0 Access Ports: 27 (each) M6 inserts at 100 pitch
0 Ceiling: Two locations containing 8 M6 inserts in a 70 X 70 mm pattern
THERMAL A total of 1000 W can be dissipated from the WV.
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Cold Plate 2 800 W
0 Allowable heat dissipation to the Air 2 200 W
VACUUM Two vacuum interfaces are provided in the WV.
0 Vacuum resource/venting is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
0 Vacuum exhaust/waste is provided Via a 1/2"" quick disconnect
AIR CIRCULATION 0 Max airﬂow rate of 1200 I/min and a max velocity of 0.044 m/s at the centerline
of the work volume.
0 Airﬂow can be varied between 15% and 100% depending on fan speed settings.
0 Negative pressures of 1.3 InB to at least 7 InB based on facility settings.
AIR FILTERING 0 Three filter banks in series provide WV air filtration. Each bank consists of 8
HEPA filters in parallel (4 front and 4 rear).
0 Particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size
ILLUMINATION Adjustable lighting available up to 1000 LuX incident light measured at the WV
center approximately 200 mm off the WV floor.
containment.
An airlock is provided below the work volume Which System (EPS) to the MSG work volume for use by
allows items to be passed into the experiment area the investigation. The experiment hardware is
Without compromising containment. provided a maximum of 1000W of power. The
following primary and secondary power interfaces
B. Electrical Power Interfaces are provided inside the work volume;
The MSG receives, conditions, and distributes
electrical power from the 188 Electrical Power
3

"
"4","0 Experiment Primary Power tape. Audio can be recorded simultaneously on all
+120 Vde Power (120 Vde, 8.3 A) four Video recorders through the MSG
- Experiment Secondary Power headset/micrOphone.
28 Vde Power, (+28 Vde, 7 A)
+12 Vdc Power, (+12 Vdc, 2 A) E. Thermal Control Interfaces
— 12 Vde Power, (—12 Vdc, 2 A) The MSG Thermal Control Subsystem (TCS)
5 Vde Power, (+5 Vde, 8 A) provides both water cooling and avionics air cooling
for experiment hardware. Water cooling is provided
Secondary power sources are converted voltages by a 350 mm X 400 mm coldplate embedded in the
derived from the DCEC converters in the MSG WV floor. The coldplate is located on the left side of
Facility. To receive power, experiment hardware the work volume floor and is capable of dissipating
must connect to the power supply connectors on the 800W under steady state conditions. Experiment
back wall of the work volume. hardware is mounted to the coldplate with M6
threaded captive fasteners. Researchers can tighten
C, Data Handling the fasteners as needed to meet their thermal
The MSG data handling system allows for requirements but they must not exceed 60 in—lbs of
communication With the MSG facility and torque.
experiments plus remote operation of the MSG The work volume air Circulation is established by
facility and experiments operating inside the WV. the MSG Air Handling Uhit (AHU)- The AHU heat
The following interfaces are provided to experiment exchanger provides 200 W 0f investigation cooling,
hardware in the work volume; MIL—STD—1553B (Via at an airﬂow rate of 1200 l/min and a maximum
the laptop computer), RS—422 Serial Interface and velocity of 0.044 m/s at the centerline of the work
Digital Input/Output (I/O) and Analog Input volume. The airﬂow can be varied between 15% and
Interface, Investigations are also provided an 100% depending on fan speed settings. The filtration
Ethernet interface that is directly connected to the System provides for particulate removal, filtration of
ISS Ethernet. single spillage, and oxidation of CO to C02 by means
of a built—in catalyst. Due to the hydroseopie nature
1). Video Systems of the MSG filters, the humidity inside the WV is
The MSG Video System is provided to observe maintained at or below the ISS cabin level.
and record experiment behavior. The MSG Video
Drawer consists of the following: four Video F. Experiment Lapt0p Computer
recorders, multi—input LCD monitors, Hitachi HV— The current laptOp provided to MSG experiments
C20 CCD full color cameras, touCh—pad, footswiteh iS an IBM A311) With a 60 gigabyte hard drive and 1
and a headset/mierophone. The Video system has the gigabyte 0f RAM- The laptop supports dual
capability to simultaneously record the Video signal, Ethernet, 1 R3232/422 (Via converter), and USB (Via
display it on the monitors and downlink the Video operating system) interfaces. The operating system is
signal to the ground. Experiments that provide their WithWS 2000 (Service Pack 4)-
own Video cameras must send both Composite and Researchers are encouraged to use the server
Y/C signals to the MSG Video system. The system on the laptop that was developed by the MSG
Composite Video signal is used to View the camera integration team. The laptop server system is a suite
images on the MSG monitors and for downlinking of applications that executes 0n the MSG Laptop
the Video signal. The MSG Video recorders require Computer. The purpose of the laptOp server is to
the Y/C Video signal. Playback is possible on all of abstract the input/output 0f the system when
the recorders. experiment applications are running and provide
The Video system can be commanded from the support for various 0n orbit operations. The laptop
ground or by the crew on—orbit. The Video system server abstracts the 1553B interface, the Serial
provides the capability to annotate text onto the Video (R3232/RS422) connections and the Medium Rate
signal and has a time counting system that can be Data Link (Ethernet). Instead of each application
recorded on the Video signal and displayed to the developer spending the time and effort required to
operator. The video system has time_lapse capability become familiar With each Of these interfaces, they
that allows for extended recording time. may concentrate upon their specific application. The
There are two types of recorders used in the MSG laptop server presents to the applications developer a
Video system: two Sony DSR_V10 DV_CAM digital relatively simple Application Program Interface
Video recorders With 40 minutes of recording time (API) that uses the basic WithWS system function
per digital tape, and two GV_A500 HigMM analog calls. The laptop server provides a consistent
recorders with 240 minutes of recording time per interface to each application and allows multiple
4

"
"5","applications to share information through the defined exchanger, and back into the WV. In this mode the
application interface. The laptop server also provides WV Will maintain a pressure differential of at least
for extensive ground commanding support (Timelines 1.3 mbar between the WV and the ISS cabin. When
& Process Control) to support un—attended operation. MSG is operating in Sealed mode, the process control
All existing interfaces to the laptop have been valve outlets are sealed off, the fans are off, and n0
verified and used in ﬂight so the risk of unfiltered air can leave the WV. This mode is also
communication problems during 0n—0rbit operations used for experiments not requiring air circulation in
is greatly reduced. Researchers can use a simple the WV.
web based system that allows them to issue As shown in Fig. 3, the MSG facility has three
commands and display experiment sensor filter banks. Each filter bank has a set of four parallel
measurements Via HTML. By utilizing the FTP front filters on a front filter plate and a set of four
server on the laptop, the experiment can take parallel rear filters on a rear filter plate. The rear
advantage of the laptop hard drive for storage of data filters provide a backup filter system. Each front filter
that can then be down linked using the 188 Medium consists of four basic elements arranged in a specific
Rate Data Link. In addition, the laptop provides a order. These elements consist of a Wire mesh Which
socket based interface to the 1553 data stream for serves as a barrier for ﬂame propagation; High—
experiment data output. Efficiency Particle Air (HEPA) filter elements for
particle filtration down to 0.3 micron size; an
G. Vacuum Resource/Exhaust and GN2 activated carbon element for adsorbing solvents,
Subsystem Chemicals and gases; and a monolith element for
The MSG is connected to the 188 Vacuum oxidizing combustion products like carbon
Resource, 188 Vacuum Exhaust, and GN2 monoxide. The rear filter is redundant with the front
subsystems. The experiment interface to these filter in its ability to filter organic solvents and
services is provided inside the WV. The vacuum convert carbon monoxide. There is no HEPA
resource/vent line is used to achieve a course installed in the rear filters.
vacuum. The vacuum exhaust/waste gas system is
used primarily for venting gases or byproducts given I. Illumination
off by the experiments. Three identical illumination units in the top of the
The experimenter is provided With quick WV provide the illumination of the working area.
disconnects at the rear wall of the WV to interface The three illumination units combine to provide
With the vacuum and GN2 resources. The WV is 1,000 LuX maximum illumination at approximately
equipped With manually operated ball valves for the 200 mm above the center of the WV ﬂoor. The
vacuum resource and eXhaust lines and a needle general illumination is variable in intensity. At the
valve for the GN2 line. There are limitations on the maximum intensity the color temperature is > 2,750
type of gases and materials that can be exhausted into K, With color rendering indeX (RA) 0f 85 or better.
the ISS vacuum system, and the temperature and The Airlock illumination provides 323 LuX general
pressure of the eXhaust gases. See the Mierogravity working light. The illumination units can be switched
Science GlovebOX (MSG) Investigation Interface 011 and off manually _
Requirements Document (MSFC—RQMT—2888) for by the crew or MSG Flltel' Banks
detailed information on connector types and interface remotely from the _.
requirements concerning the vacuum and GN2 ground. I""'1'"" :nr ‘1 -
subsystem. FF- . I_ i
J. Airlock :"" I}: -' ' . II !
H. Air Circulation and Filtration The airlock, ! f '1 ""“ -"" :' "" '
The MSG Air Handling Unit (AHU) has three shown in Fig. 3, is a I 1- "" 1 ' '
separate fans that draw air from the WV through the bOX—like structure ! _.,.~ .” IF.""
filter banks and pushes it through the water to air heat attached to the bottom 1 , _ '_ .
exchanger, the Process Control Valves and into the plate of the WV With '- fan III""
Air Discharge Duet, Where the air is re—directed an allowable work Ail'lOEFhHM-jx -
towards the WV. These fans maintain the WV area of approximately HE \R :
pressure lower than the cabin pressure. Any 26 liters. There The T“ _ -
potentially contaminated air can only eXit the WV Via airlock provides a r . {1,-
the reference outlet following filtration. When the means of moving . i""
MSG is operating in Normal mode, the process items in and out of the
control valve is set to allow the air in the WV to be work volume Without , ,
recirculated through the filters, the fans, the heat breaking containment. Figure 3' MSG Fllter Banks.
5

"
"6","K. Available MSG Facilities integrated Circuits, sensors for medical imaging
The MSG project hardware consists of an equipment, and detectors of nuclear radiation.
operational Flight Unit on—board the International To control the opto—eleetronie properties of the
Space Station, a high fidelity training unit at the semiconductor crystals, a small amount of an
Johnson Space Center (JSC), a ground unit at the impurity — named a dopant — is added to the pure
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and a ﬂight semiconductor. Uniform distribution of the dopant in
equivalent engineering unit at MSFC. The ground the semiconductor crystal is essential for production
unit is functionally equivalent to the ﬂight unit and is of opto—eleetronie devices.
available to researchers for development testing and For the SUBSA investigation, tellurium and zinc
fit checks. The engineering unit is identical to the were used as dopants in an indium antimonide
ﬂight unit and is used to fully verify experiment sample. The samples were heated to 850 degrees
compatibility prior to ﬂight. In addition, the Celsius and then directionally solidified to form a
engineering unit is available for troubleshooting of solid single crystal. The SUBSA samples were
in—ﬂight anomalies during ﬂight operations. loaded in Clear quartz arnpoules and the SUBSA
A teleseienee center at MSFC provides thermal Chamber had a transparent gradient zone
researchers a link to interact with the experiment which allowed the entire process to be captured on
during ﬂight operations. The investigator can be Video. Indium antimonide was selected because of its
located at either MSFC or their home laboratory, low melting point of around 525 degrees Celsius and
where they are connected Via communication links. because it is useful for creating models that apply to a
The entire communication loop from the teleseienee variety of semiconductors. During processing, the
center to the payload in the MSG can be simulated scientist was able to observe the down linked Video
using the MSG engineering unit and the teleseienee images and command the furnace from the
facilities at MSFC. This allows for a thorough Cheek teleseienee center at the Marshall Space Flight center
out of payload hardware, software, and to position the solid/liquid interface in the most
communication systems prior to ﬂight and affords the optimum position prior to the start of directional
researcher a high degree of confidence that the solidification. This unique capability, provided by
planned experiment will be successful in orbit. the MSG facility, allowed the scientist to optimize
the investigation real time, and maximize the
11. Overview of the Research Accomplished in scientific return-
the MSG Facility to Date The SUBSA investigation was setup 0n—0rbit by
. . Astronaut Pe Whitson and corn leted 0 eration in
To date, the MSG faeihty has logged over ggy . . p p
. . . October 2002 as part of Expedition 5. The SUBSA
5000 hours of 0n—0rb1t operations process1ng 16 . . . . .
. . . . . investigation was des1gned and built by TeC—Masters
investigations. Areas of seienee that have benefited .
. . . . . Inc. under contract With the NASA Marshall Space
from experiments in the MSG include, ﬂu1d phys1es, . . .
. . . Flight Center in Huntsv1lle, Alabama.
materials seienee, combustion, thermal control,
protein crystal growth, plant growth, fire detection, . .
. T awards Understanding Pore Formation and
and technology demonstration. The paragraphs that . . . . .
. . . . . . Mobility Durmg Controlled Directional
follow contain a brief synops1s 0f the investigations . . . . . . . .
. Solldlfwatwn m a erogravrty Envrronment
that have been performed in the MSG. 2
(PFMI)
, , , The PFMI investigation sought to improve
A' Unlted States Sponsored Investlgatlons seienee’s understanding of solidification processes
, , , , , , and the effects of im erfeetions in the molten
Solldlfwatwn Usmg a Bafﬂe m Sealed Ampoules . 1 O E h I11) . . 1 1
SUB S A ) 1 rnater1a. n art w en SClCIltlStS. met meta s,
( . . . . bubbles that form in the molten material can rise to
One of the first materials seienee experiments on . . .
. . . . . . the surface, pop and disappear. In micrograV1ty, the
the International Space Station — the Solidifieation 1. . . .
. . 1ghter bubbles do not rise and disappear. Prior space
Using a Bafﬂe 1n Sealed Ampoules (SUBSA) .
. . . . . . experiments have shown that bubbles often become
investigation was conducted during Expedition 5 . .
. . . . . trapped in the final metal or crystal sample. In the
inside the MicrograV1ty Selenee GlovebOX. SUBSA . .
. . . solid, these bubbles, 0r p0r0s1ty, are defects that
was the first experiment to operate in the MSG . . . . ,
. . . . dinnnish both the material s strength and usefulness.
faeihty 0n the International Space Station. . . . . .
. . . . . . The Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation
The main ObJCCtIVC 0f the SUBSA investigation . .
. . . melted samples of a transparent modeling material,
was to improve the understanding of the formation of . . . . . .
. . sueeinonitrile (SCN) and sueeinonitrile water
semiconductor crystals. Semiconductor crystals are . . . .
. mixtures. The transparent material allowed seientists
used for many products such as computer Chips,
6

"
"7","to observe how bubbles form in the samples and field in the ﬂuid. The cameras, equipped with
study their movements and interactions. microscopic lenses, record the activities of the ﬂuid

The PFMI experiments heated the SCN samples microstructures with and without the magnetic field.
to approximately 120 degrees Celisus and .
directionally solidified them at translation velocities - A .- "" .
of 0.5 micrometers per second up to 10 micrometers ""
per second. Two cameras were used to collect real— _, ""
time images of the samples as they were melted and 7 . 7 U. ,
subsequently resolidified in the thermal chamber. ‘ *' ’ :3 4 § gg . x? ,, ‘ /'

Images were sent to the investigator on the , , -\_ _\ 2 ' . E; W ‘4; /- -
ground working in the telescience center at Marshall ./ : ‘2 . 1 - ‘3' ‘ , 7 ' 7 .7 S_ Q
Space Flight Center. The investigator manipulated ({ ' r a .1 ;:=~—-——-—:;__. g; 2:,
the investigation by sending commands to Change "" ‘ . it ‘ngmméf
temperatures, growth rates and other variables that ‘ _' ' . 4-3 T n“ . i 9""“ ""
affected sample processing. “ f —‘ -'5~‘!im: . ’ ' ""‘

The PFMI investigation processed over 20 ' \ . “:2“? ”T /
samples in orbit and was returned on STS—116 in I 'I II “ \
December 2006. The PFMI hardware and software ‘ ' ' \
was designed and built by TeC—Masters Inc. under .mmsm A
contract with the NASA Marshall Space Flight Figure 4. InSPACE Operating in MSG On-Orbit.
Center in Huntsvﬂle, Alabama. The original InSPACE experiments were operated

. . . by Astronaut Don Pettit as part of Expedition 6.
Investigating the Structure .Of Paramagnegw Two additional coil assemblies and eight sample Vials
Aggregates from CalIOldql Emulswns (InSPACE) were launched to 188 on STS—120/10A, October 23,

The InSPACE investigation exarnined the way 2007. The InSPACE hardware was installed in the
small magnetic particles interacted With the complex MSG in January 2008 and completed over 42
properties found in magnetorheological ﬂuids. experiments before the MSG was moved to the
Magnetorheolegical (MR) ﬂuids are. a class ,Of Columbus Module in March of 2008. InSPACE has
""smart"" materials capable Of prOVIdmfg a. rapitl, completed it’s primary science objectives but
controllable re§POHSC .when a rhagnetic ﬁeld is additional science can be gained by reprocessing
applied. The micrograVIty ISS enVironment allowed samples using different parameters. Therefore,
research 0h particle interaetioh without the effects of InSPACE is currently a candidate for voluntary
sedimentation. An ObJeCUV? Of the InSPACE Science on the ISS and will be operated again as
irivestigation was to determine the true three— crew time and the MSG facility become available. A
thmensmnal lOW'energy SWFWC Of a MR emu1s10n new set of samples is currently planned for launch on
T“ 3, P1113“, magnet” ,fleld- , The, InSPACE STS—131/19A in February 2010. The InSPACE
investigation Visually studied the f1na1,fine structure investigations were designed and built by ZIN
0f the MR ﬂuid in a pulsed magnetic field. This study T e chnolo gies Inc. under contract with the N AS A
helped researchers understand the competing forces Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio.
that govern the final shape of the structures.

The InSPACE hardware consisted of five major Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures-Z (CSLM-2)4
parts: the Helmholtz coil assembly containing the CSLM—2 is a materials science experiment
sealed V131 .that hows the MR ﬂE‘ld; an OPUCS designed to study the rate at which particles of tin
assembly Wlth two long workingidistance lenses, suspended in a liquid comprised of molten tiIﬂlead
cameras, and 1321.86 plate; an ayionics assembly alloy, increase in size. This process is called
containing two displays, a square—wave generator, coarsening.
and the power distribution box; the light source CSLM—2 used the microgravity environment on
assembly;. and three V1460 recorders, Wthh are p art the 188 to prevent the tin particles from rising to the
Of the MicrograV1ty SCICHCC,GI9VCbOX (MSG) The top of the mixture as well as to eliminate convection
crew inserts the C011 assemblies into the optics plate. in the tirﬂlead mixture, which can inﬂuenc e
The square—wave generator then sends pulsed power coarsening.
input along the Helmholtz coil, generating a magnetic

7

"
"8","In any mixture that contains particles of different CSLM—2 experiment. The CSLM—2 hardware
sizes, the large particles tend to grow while the interfaces to the MSG power, communications, and
smaller particles shrink. Tiny oil droplets coalescing vacuum resources in support of experiment
into a large blob are one illustration, but the process operations.
occurs in solids as well. Coarsening occurs on Earth Data gathered by the CSLM—2 experiment will
during the processing of any metal alloy and thus the advance the development of new high—temperature
coarsening process affects products from dental materials, such as those used in nuclear propulsion
fillings t0 turbine blades. Since the properties of an and waste heat coolant processes by investigating the
alloy are linked to the size of the particles within the kinetics of competitive particle growth within a liquid
solid, coarsening can be used to strengthen materials. matrix. During this process, called coarsening, small
This is the case with the majority of aluminum alloys particles shrink by losing atoms to larger particles
used commercially today. Conversely, if the causing the larger particles to grow or coarsen. The
coarsening process proceeds too long the material can science team is headed by Professor Peter Voorhees
weaken. This occurs in jet turbine blades and is one of the Department of Materials Science and
0f the reasons turbine blades must be replaced after a Engineering at Northwest University
certain number of hours of serVice. Thus developing On August 8, 2007, five CSLM—2 SPUs were
accurate models of the coarsening process is central launched on the Space Shuttle Endeavour for
to creating a wide range of new materials from those operations onboard the International Space Station
used in automobiles to those used in space that started November 2007. All five SPUs were
applications. The results of previous experiments processed by December 31, 2007. These SPUs were
performed on the Shuttle have done just that. These returned on STS—l22/ 1E in February 2008. Three
models have been incorporated into a computer code additional samples were launched on STS—l23/1JA in
that is being used to design many new materials, March 2008 and processed in MSG in April 2008.
including materials of importance to NASA's These samples were returned on STS—l24/1J in May
spaceﬂight program. Solid—liquid systems are ideal 2008. The CSLM—2 investigations was designed and
systems to study this coarsening process. However, built by ZIN Technologies Inc. under contract with
gravity can induce particle sedimentation and thus the NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland,
hamper the studies of coarsening in these mixtures on Ohio.

Earth.
. , Smoke Aerosol Measurement Experiment
. , . ‘ “ "" _ *_- (SAME)5
' ' "" ' . _ I . . The SAME investigation was developed by the
: 5’ .' - ,2; a NASA Glenn Research Center, ZIN Technologies,
“ . f and the National Institute of Standards and
- I ' .1 ' (w): » Technologies (NIST). The SAME experiment is
‘ _ ‘ V"" r u ""s ,1 ’/ designed to determine the particle size distributions
) '.' a; i h j of the smokes generated from a variety of
_ ,‘ \_ g, — overheated spacecraft materials and from
' ' "" “ ""' $51? . microgravity fires. The objective is to provide the
,WW 4’ l . ' ' ' «J 7 a, data that spacecraft designers need to properly
.m- ' ' ‘ «--—:---- .. a design and implement fire detection in spacecraft.
i° c . '55 ' ' ' - \ This investigation evaluated the performance of
i -‘ . , ””0"""" x smoke detectors currently in use aboard the space

a ° ‘- , 5's. ' ' a. shuttle and 188.

Issoo7E10472 Spacecraft smoke detectors must detect
Figure 5- CSLM'2 Setup in MSG- different types of smoke. For example, hydrocarbon

The CSLM—2 Experiment in the MSG consists of fuels typically produce SOOt and plastics produce
an Electronics Control Unit (ECU), Sample droplets of recondensed polymer fragments. While
Processing Unit (SPU) and associated cables and paper and silicone rubber produce smoke comprised
mounting hardware. The SPU is an evacuated 0f liquid droplets 0f recondensed PYYOIYSiS PTOdUCtS-
thermal chamber which will heat the samples to 185 Each Of these materials produces a different type 0f
0C for a specified duration. At the conclusion of the smoke, With particles 0f various sizes and properties.
heat soak time the samples will be quenched utilizing SAME assessed the size and diStﬁbUﬁOH Of
a pressurized water reservoir. The ECU is a smoke particles produced by different types 0f
microprocessor based data acquisition and control material found 011 spacecraft SUCh as, Teﬂon, Kapton,
system designed specifically for conducting the cellulose, and silicone rubber. SAME evaluated the

8

"
"9","performance of the ionization smoke detectors (used Arabidopsis thaliana plant’s outer most layer (Cell
011 Space Shuttles), evaluated the performance of the Wall) genetic composition as it relates to the
photoelectric smoke detectors (used on the ISS) and structural make—up and rigidness 0f the cell wall. It
collected data for which a numerical formula can be has been determined from ground experimentation
developed. This formula will be used to predict that the structural or physiological continuum of the
smoke droplet growth and to evaluate alternative microtubule plasma membrane cell wall is the source
smoke detection devices on future spacecraft of stability from various gravitational forces. CWRW
The SAME experiment provided technology for will investigate the microtubule plasma membrane—
an advanced fire detector for future spacecraft that cell wall as it relates to the gravitational resistance of
will be used for long duration missions. SAME the Arabidopsis thaliana. Observation of the genes
provided quantitative data on the sensitivity of these that comprise the cell wall of the Arabidopsis will be
detectors. The current Fire Prevention, Detection, conducted in 1 g and microgravity conditions. Upon
and Suppression (FPDS) program plan allows for the completion of the investigation, the specimens’ stems
re—evaluation of future sensor technology, to allow will be analyzed on the ground for the effects of 1 g
new technology and capability to be utilized. The and microgravity conditions. The Arabidopsis
results from SAME are needed to provide the thaliana mutates in hyper—gravity conditions with
reduced gravity baseline data against which future minuet survival capabilities. In microgravity
detection technology developments can be evaluated. conditions the mutated specimens are expected to
The smoke detectors developed from the results of gain Viability. Proof of this theory will be examined
SAME can also be useful in other extreme by way of the European Modular Cultivation System
environments on Earth, such as submarines 0r (EMCS) internal Video recorders, as mutant strains
underwater laboratories. SAME was transported to will be developed inside of EMCS. CWRW will
188 in August 2007 on Shuttle ﬂight STS—118/13A.1. examine four strains of Arabidopsis, each of which
.. n 7 —-§ LEW l : \ will be cultivated in the EMCS facility in MSG under
_” ' ' ‘ - 5i X controlled conditions. Once the experiment is
. 9 EC: Jzﬂiqiﬂiﬂiﬂfﬂ ﬂii. _ﬂﬁ§ "" a completed the sample specimens will be evaluated on
,"" I 7 f ' “ ‘ ""' ,_, a"" .4; '- 3,5173%; ) , . ' earth for Changes in gene Characteristics responsible
2‘ iv / a ,ﬁ 7— _ ' ’4] ,1 for the development of microtubules, plasma
3 f ' M! f ' ‘ . . membrane, cell walls, and relative phenotypes. The
. : ii ‘1. ii ﬁ 1 Vii 'I ‘ objective of the CW/RW investigation is to analyze
‘ f a . ' "" +» £3,» the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the
f“,- 155""”, I ?j- ) 4 development of supporting tissues (Cell Wall) in
~ ﬂy ‘ 737,: , "" _ ‘ 1 earth plants under induced gravitational forces.
E$> . ' ""ﬁ'éa t. ‘ ~ Ultimately, the theory that a defined set of cell wall
x; ‘2? ‘ ' // E3325” — — ‘ *‘s
Figure 6. SAME in MSG On-Orbit. W- , ,
On—orbit operations in the MSG were completed in ,s 1
October 2007. The SAME investigation was ’3 «- \,
designed and built by ZIN Technologies Inc. under . f ? 1
contract with the NASA Glenn Research Center in - — 5 a
Cleveland, Ohio. . "" _
Cell Wall/Reverse Genetic Approach to
Exploring Genes Responsible for Cell Wall . _ ,
Dynamics in Supporting T issues of Arabidopsis W '7\ “*3?” .5
Under Microgravity Conditions and Resist ~ Vex! »- ,
Wall/Role 0f Microtubule-Membrane-Cell Wall 9*; 1 \ .15
Continuum in Gravity Resistance in Plants K\/’
(CWRW) 6
The Arabidopsis thaliana is considered the ideal 1‘- A
model for plant research in the area of genetics and Figure 7' CWRW Hardware.
plant growth. CWRW is an investigation of the
9

"
"10","genes contribute to the strength of supporting tissue distribution, controllers, and data acquisition and
in plants and that their gene Characteristics are storage. It also contains the Video system that
manipulated by gravity Will be evaluated. The results combines the camera View and data display onto one
of these investigations Will support future plans to Video signal for recording and downlink. The
cultivate plants on long—duration exploration rheometer contains the rotational preshear motor,
missions. CW/RW was transported to the translation slider, sensitive force transducer,
International Space Station (188) on Shuttle ﬂight electroluminescent backlight panel, laser micrometer,
STS—123/1J/A in March 2008 and completed and thermistors. During operation it contains one of
harvesting operations in the MSG in May 2008 . J _ _. ' - ‘ . ., .-
1'! ' _...,_... T .. . - ' l- 3""!

Shear History Extensional Rheology Experiment Ely; ' ' , _ ' U *- j; 3;
(SHERE)7 5;” _ - 1""""; ;.' I. '“'. A; .

The main objective of SHERE is to study the _ 5' W. - """"'"" I . i *5 . '
effect of rotational preshear 0n the extensional - .L - --'- .....= "" a 'r'- T *'
behavior of a ﬂuid. Of specific interest is the ' ' ' "" ﬂ ;-- ._n. ""I I I
transient evolution of the microstructure and - - -= Ti?"" -”‘:ﬁ "".54.. .
Viscoelastie tensile stresses that are present during the d' '1 ""_H F'.‘ "" - ._.;I - .. .
extension of the ﬂuid. ' g ' .rﬂl -

The combination of both shearing and extensional . __-_ - ht; \
ﬂows is common in many polymer—proeessing — _ “""1""
operations such as extrusion, blow—molding and fiber __ _ a *-_.'.‘!.' ,
spinning. Therefore, knowledge of the complete ' ' ' ._.§ "" ' :'
rheological properties of the polymer ﬂuid is required . _... a _ . '
in order to accurately predict and account for its ﬂow ﬁe - .P — 3""
behavior. In addition, if numerical simulations are to Figure 8. SHERE Setup in MSG.
serve as a priori des1gn tools for optimizmg polymer
processing operations, then it is critical to have an the 25 fhhd modules. The camera arm attaches t0
accurate knowledge of the extensional Viscosity and rheometer for Video recording of the stretched ﬂuid’s
its variation with temperature, concentration, shape. The tool box contains miscellaneous tools
molecular weight, and strain rate. used during setup and operation of the experiment.

Unlike common Newtonian ﬂuids, complex ﬂuids The keyboard is used to control the experiment With
such as polymers cannot be Characterized by a single the help 0f the MSG Video monitor. The 25 fhhd
material parameter such as the Newtonian (shear) modules contain thC ﬂllld that W111 b6 ShCﬂI‘Cd and
Viscosity. Instead, they eXhibit nonlinear responses to stretched during the course 0f the experiment. Each
imposed deformations. The extensional function of ﬂthd module contains prepackaged Boger ﬂthd» and
non—Newtonian ﬂuids is not constant but depends on 311 samples are identical. Figure 8 shows the SHERE
both the rate of deformation and the total strain hardware assembled in the MSG Engineering Uhit
experienced by a ﬂuid element. (EU) during integrated testing at the Marshall Space

A Class of dilute polymer solutions, collectively Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.
referred to as ‘Boger ﬂuids,’ has become a popular The SHERE experiment hardware was launched
Choice for rheological studies of non—Newtonian t0 133 Oh STS—120/10A, October 23, 2007- Twenty—
ﬂuids and will be used in the SHERE experiment. ﬁVC ﬂllld modules were launched OH STS-123/1J/A
These ideal elastic ﬂuids eXhibit a nearly constant (March 2008)- Operations in the MSG started in JUTY
shear Viscosity, Which allows a direct comparison of 2008 and are on—going at the writing Of this paper.
Boger ﬂuids With Newtonian ﬂuids having similar Additional SHERE samples are planned for launch
viscosities. The high Viscosity of the suspending 0h STS-126MLFZ in November 2008- The SHERE
solvent results in long relaxation times and investigations were designed and built by ZIN
substantial normal stresses, and the low concentration Technologies Inc. under contract With the NASA
of high molecular weight polymers facilitates Glenn Research Center in C1eve1and,Ohi0.
modeling analysis.

SHERE is designed to operate in the Mierogravity B. European Space Agency Sponsored
Science GlovebOX (MSG) 0n the International Space Investigations
Station (188). The main SHERE hardware consists Since the inception of the MSG program, ESA
0f the interface box, rheometer, camera arm, cabling, has developed and operated nine successful
keyboard. In addition, there are 25 ﬂuid modules in a investigations in the MSG facility. Four experiments
stowage tray. The interface box contains all power were developed by BSA as part Of the Belgian TaXi

10

"
"11","Flight (BTF). The investigations included COSMIC,
DCCO, Nanoslab, and PrornISS—l. This series of Microgravity Experiment For the Measurement of
experiments were a part of the science research Diffusion Coefﬁcients in Crude Oil (DCC0)9
activities performed in November 2002 aboard the This research program aims to investigate the
188 by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of Belgian isothermal diffusion and the Soret effect
nationality. Nanoslab encountered technical (thermodiffusion). The scientific community and
difficulties and was not able to complete all of the petroleum industries have a great interest in the
scientific objectives. accurate measurements of diffusion and Soret

In October 2003, Spanish astronaut, Pedro Duque, coefficients. The DCCO experiment objective was to
performed MSG investigations Nanoslab and measure diffusion coefficients of ternary mixtures of
PromISS—2 as part of the Spanish Soyuz Mission. The organic compounds. The experimental data set
Nanoslab investigation was a follow on to the included different liquid mixture rnass fractions. The
Nanoslab investigation that encountered technical mixtures were composed of n—dodecane,
difficulties during the Belgian TaXi Flight. Duque tetrahydronaphthalene and isobutylbenzene that are
spent eight days aboard the Space Station conducting compounds representative of the crude oil Chemical
science experiments under a commercial contract families. The principle was to introduce liquid A into
between BSA and the Russian Aviation and Space a column of the ternary mixture B by removal of a
Agency. slider gate. During the three to five hours—eXpected

In April 2004, MSG investigations HEAT and diffusion duration, the process was monitored with
ARGES were operated as part of the Dutch Soyuz a dual wavelength MaCh—Zehnder interferometer,
Mission. The experiments were performed by Dutch measuring the Change in refractive indeX induced by
ESA cosmonaut / astronaut Andre Kuipers who was concentration gradients. From the resulting
launched to 188 from the Russian launch site interferograrns recorded on a photo camera, the
Baikonur on April 19, 2004. concentration gradients are derived as a function of

A thirty day PromISS—3 investigation was time. The DCCO experiment was performed by
performed in J anuary and February of 2004. The Belgian astronaut Frank de Winne as part of the
same setup was also used during another thirty day Belgian TaXi Flight.
PromISS—4 investigation that started in J anuary 2006.
This illustrates the usefulness of the MSG facility. NANOSLABM
The primary investigation hardware remains on— NANOSLAB is a physical science investigation
board and future investigations require relatively involving zeolites. Zeolites are crystal formations
little up mass to deliver new samples for follow on with structured spaces or pores that allow them to
experiments. absorb or hold onto other materials such as water.

The following paragraphs provide a brief The NANOSLAB research has significance in areas
summary explanation of these ESA investigations. including the petrochemical industry. The aim of this
For more detailed information concerning these experiment is to try and create more effective zeolite
investigations, please refer to the European Space crystal structures by mixing different zeolite
Agency web page at http_://www.esa.int. solutions with a range of crystal—forming catalysts.

The NANOSLAB experiment was conducted by

Combustion Synthesis under Microgravity Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque as part of the Spanish
Conditions ( COSMI C )8 Soyuz Mission.

COSMIC studied microstructure formation of
compressed powder samples (in casu Ti—Al—B) during Protein Microscope for the International Space
self—propagating high—ternperature combustion Station (PromISS- 1, 2, 3& 4 )11
processes (SHS). The main scientific objective was The PromISS investigations are a study of the
the investigation of the relationship between general crystallization of proteins in microgravity conditions.
physico—Chernical mechanisms of combustion and These investigations seek to provide information that
formation of the microstructure and composition will lead to a better understanding of the fundamental
fields. The COSMIC experiment was a part of the processes underlying the protein crystallization
science research activities performed aboard the ISS process. The major objective of the experiments is to
by Frank de Winne, ESA astronaut of Belgian produce a detailed analysis and quantitative
nationality in the frame of the ODISSEA Project. The interpretation of the relationship between the quality
European Space Agency and Belgian Federal Office of the crystals and the environment in which they
for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs (OSTC) were produced. The objectives are to:
were responsible for preparation and implementation
of the scientific program.

11

"
"12","0 Further evaluate the effect of microgravity on of heat ﬂow sustainable in three different modes:
crystal quality, as compared to experiments in — Anti—parallel heating/Cooling (i.e. heating from
gel. one side of the pipe then cooling from opposite

0 Confirm that the removal of convection by the side).
use of gels has a similar effect as microgravity — Mixed heating/Cooling conditions (i.e. heating

0 Quantify the relationship between position of from tWO sides 0f the pipe then cooling from 0116
growth of the crystal and crystal quality. Of these sides)

0 The validation of the existing mathematical

The PromISS investigation uses a Digital model that is used to evaluate the performances
Holography Microscope to analyze the crystallization 0f 116W heat pipes.
process. The PromISS—l experiment was performed 0 To prove that the grooved heat pipe design can
during the Belgian TaXi Flight in November 2002. cope with the formation and trapping of vapor
Preliminary results obtained show that the instrument bubbles in the pipe. A build up of vapor 0n the
was strongly affected by Vibrations and the inner surface of a pipe creates an insulating
temperature profile of the mission. These factors had layer, which reduces the pipes effectiveness to
a bad impact on the quality of the results obtained. transfer heat.

An upgraded version of the PromISS—l hardware,
called PROMISS—2 was uploaded with Progress HP The Heat investigation was performed in April
in August 2003 and operated as part of the Spanish 2004 as part of the Dutch Soyuz Mission.

Soyuz Mission (SSM). Six PROMISS experiment

cells were uploaded with the Soyuz 7S, analyzed with ARGES Investigation -- Energy efﬁcient lamps for

the PROMISS—2 optical diagnostic hardware over 10 the future”

days, and downloaded with the Soyuz 68. The ARGES investigation sought to improve the
The PromISS—3 experiment was a re—ﬂight 0f the understanding of High—Intensity Discharge (HID)

previous PromISS—2 experiment performed during lamps and how they are affected by imperfections.
the Spanish Soyuz Mission, but with an investigation The ARGES experiment examined these HID lamps
of the experimental cells in the Digital Holography in the microgravity environment of the International
Microscope 0f 30 days. After the 30 day processing, Space Station.
the samples were stowed in an incubator The ceramic container of a HID lamp holds
(AQUARIUS) for 2 months, and then returned on several metal gasses, sealed under high pressure. If a
Soyuz 88. The PromISS—3 & 4 experiments are an powerful electrical current runs through the gaseous
adaptation of a digital holography instrument content, the metal atoms in the gas pick up energy
developed by ULB—MRC for the observation of and radiate light. However, over time the gaseous
counter—diffusion experiments in microgravity. This contents begin to de—miX or separate away from each
instrument provided a View of the crystallization other. As a consequence not every part of the lamp
reactions in terms of density gradients in the solution has an equivalent amount of energy to transfer into
and 0f the localization of the crystals. The light.

observation of the density gradients should make it Unstable plasma Channels and de—mixed gasses

possible to evaluate models of the diffusion and are the two biggest problems in HID lamps.

residual convection in the crystallization process. Therefore, the main Objectives of the ARGES

This information, together with the localization of the experiment were to determine which factors were

crystals, and the observation of the timing of their causing these two problems. To do this, the ARGES

growth, can allow the identification of the growth investigation employed a high—resolution emission
conditions of the crystals. This information can then spectrometer to analyze a series of individually
be related to crystal quality and internal order. lighted HID lamps. Each light—produeing gas in the

HID has its own spectrum. The emission

Heat transfer performance of a grooved heat pipe spectrometer was used to determine which gases

(Heat)12 were present in small areas within the lamp.

Heat was an investigation of the effectiveness of Like the Heat investigation, the ARGES
grooved heat pipes in the weightlessness of space. investigation was performed in April 2004 as part of
The main aims of this technology demonstration the Dutch Soyuz Mission.
were;

111. Future MSG Investigations

' The Characterization 0f the heat transfer The many capabilities of the MSG detailed in this
performance Of a grooved heat pipe in paper, make it an ideal platform for research required
weightlessness, by measuring the maximum rate

12

"
"13","to advance the technology readiness levels (TRL) (IVIDIL) investigation, and the Aggregation of
needed for the Orion crew exploration vehicle. Colloidal Solutions (COLLOID) investigation. The
Related areas of research that Will benefit from objective of this series of investigations is to;
investigations in the MSG include combustion, ﬂuids 0 Study diffusion and Soret phenomena and
physics, thermal control, fire suppression and measurement of these coefficients in multi—
deteetion, in situ fabrication and repair, material component mixtures (liquids).
science, and life sciences. Investigations currently 0 Study the inﬂuence of controlled Vibration stimuli
planned fOI‘ near—term OpCI‘EltiOIl 111 the MSG 111C111d€ on these diffusion processes.
BXF, CCF, SPICE, InSPACE—3, SODI—DSC, SODI' 0 Study the aggregation (clustering) of colloidal
IVIDIL, SODI—COLLOID, and IVGEN. The solutionS.
following paragraphs provide a brief overview of
MSG investigations that are planned for operation in The instrumentation Will employ several optical
the next tWO years. diagnostic methods including;
. . 0 Mach Zehnder interferometry (MZI)
A. Investlgatlons Planneci for Near Term . Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM)
Operation 1n the MSG Fac111ty . Near Field Scattering (NFS)
. . . 14 0 Particle Image Veloeimetry (PIV)
Smoke Pomt m Coﬂow Experiment (SPICE) Photogrammetry (PM)
The smoke—point phenomena is a Classical metric
in the untierstanding Of the heat release .and spread These methods Will be used to analyze a selection
rate of fires. It is commonly used in 1—g fire of liquids and gases in the microgravity environment.
modehhg and by extension W111 be Of value. for The SODI investigations Will be transported to 188
predicting the heat release rate of low—grawty fires. on two Shuttle ﬂights. The SODI hardware al on g
The Laminar Soot Processes (LSP) experiment has with the DSC and IVIDIL components will be 011
shown that the onset of the microgravity smoke point Shuttl e ﬂight STS—128/17A in July 2009 The
in a quiescent environment is very different from that COLLOID components will b e on Shuttle Flight
seen in normal gravity. SPICE seeks to extend our STS—129ﬂJLF3 in October 2009
understanding by looking at the interaction of '
ambient ﬂew With the smoke p01nt, enabling us to Boiling eXperiment Facility (BXF)16
better predictheat release from low—grawty fires and The BXF i nV e sti gati on will obtain data 11 e e d e d t 0
to better p rediet their growth rate. , , , understand the process involved with boiling in
Current NASA spacecraft materials selection is gravity and microgravity. This research should enable
based up on a Slmphﬁed test method (NASA_STD_ the development of more efficient cooling systems on
6001 Test 1) that segregates material based upon 1—g futur e s pae e craft and on Earth
behavior Without real consideration of low—g effects. B oili n g efficiently removes lar g e amounts of h eat
Improved understanding Of heat release from 10‘2th by generating vapor from liquid. It is being used in
fires W111 allow more Clolmplete land effective electric power plants, electronic cooling and
at11izat10n Of the results. T eseresu ts can be used purification and separation of Chemical mixtures. An
tn first—order mpdels and predictions Of heat release upper limit, called the critical heat flux, eXists Where
in spacecraft fires and as it, meaﬂs to extend heat the heater is covered With so much vapor that liquid
rellease data from tits 1k: tle NAZSA elone— supply to the heater begins to decrease. Supplying
ea orimeter test (NAS _SfTD_ 00 Test ) t0 0W1 constant power above this limit for prolonged periods
grav1ty fires to a p er orrhanee based materia can increase the heater temperature to the point
selectioh process. SPICE W111 b? delivered to the whereby the heater is destroyed. Determination of
International Space Stat10n(ISS)1n November 2008 critical heat flux in microgravity is essential for
on .Shuttle ﬂlgtit STS‘126/UEF21' , SPICE V338 designing cooling systems for space. Therefore,
designed and bmt by ZIN TCC n0 ogies Inc. un er boiling is being studied to increase the effectiveness
contract With the NASA Glenn Research Center in of e 0 01in g in sp a e e
Cleveland, Ohlo' The Boiling eXperiment Facility (BXF) Will
. . . 15 house two separate investigations, Mieroheater Array
Selectable Optics Diagnostics Iltstrumefzt (SODI) B oiling Experiment (M ABE) and Nueleate Pool
The SODI hardware is being designed by tie Boiling eXperiment (NPBX). The purpose of the
European. Space Agency (BSA) t; opefrfate. in t 3 EXP is to validate models being developed for heat
MSG faeihty. and accommodate t e D1 usion an transfer coefficients, critical heat ﬂux and the pool
Soret Coeffieients (DSC) measurement investigation, b oilin g curves. BXF will b e transported to the 188 on
the Inﬂuence of Vibration 0n Diffusion in Liquids
13

"
"14","STS—l3l (19A) currentl scheduled for launch in IntraVenous ﬂuids GENeration and mixing (IVGEN)
Y
February 2010. BXF is being designed and built by is a project whose objective is to design a compact
ZIN Technolo ies Inc. under contract with the NASA water urification s stem to reliably produce Sterile
g P Y
Glenn Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio. Water for In'ection (SW1) and provide a
J
pharmaceutical mixing capability in a reduced
Critical Velocities in Open Capillary Channels gravity environment with minimal dependency on
(CCF)17 spacecraft power resources. IVGEN will be ﬂown to
The CCF EX eriment refers to a versatile the 188 on STS—l3l (19A) currently scheduled for
P
experiment program for studying an important launch in February 2010.
variety of inertial—capillary dominated ﬂows that are
of basic interest in ﬂuid physics and at the same time IV, MSG’S Role in the International Space
key to certain space applications, but cannot be Station National Laboratory
studied on the ground. Applications of the results are
directed to the portion of the aerospace community The 2005 N AS A Authorization Ac t designated
Challenged by the containment, storage, and handling . .
. . . . the US portions of the 188 as a national laboratory
of large liquid inventories (fuels, cryogens, water) . ,,.
aboard spacecraft The results are expected to be and directed NASA to develop a plan to increase the
immediatel useﬂil for the desi n and testin and utilization of the 188 by other Federal entities and the
. y. . . . g . .g’ private sector..."" As the Nation's newest national
instrumentation for verification and validation of laborator the IS S will further stren then
liquid management systems of current orbiting, . y.’ g. .

. relationships among NASA, other Federal entities,
des1gn stage, and advanced spacecraft. The results . . . .
will also be useful to improved life support system and private sector leaders in the pursuit of national

. . . priorities for the advancement of science, technology,
design, p hase separation, and enhaneing current en ineerin and mathematics The 188 National
system reliability by designing into the system g g, . '

. . . . . , . Laboratory Wlll also open new paths for the
pass1ve (in this case capillary ) redundaneies. The eX loration and economic develo ment of S ace
CCF hardware is scheduled to be transported to 188 p p p '
in February 2010 on STS_131 (19A)' 1. The National Laboratory concept is an opportunity
In traVenous Fluids GENeration and mixing to expand the US economy in space—based research,

applications and operations.
(IVGEN )18
,_ . 2. The International Space Station represents a
J Hi unique and highly Visible national asset with surplus
capacity available for a wide spectrum of
""L. / ‘1 _ / applications.
, ' I // -0211: flow IT'IEIEY
;. xii; - .ﬁ FTU'MI 3. NASA will continue to cover cost of operatin g
o. l"" - . 7-. '9“ ""\g H and maintaining the ISS, and is highly motivated to
‘ 'P ' . -7 ~\ . ' _ work with other a encies and organizations to pursue
u \/ Nut: I _K.|:.1Ll.|:-|.srl.a 19 g
2:323?“ ,k ~ y’I/JTE‘L"" _ f ”b applications.
Wcmmemw ' I u ‘ When the ISS Facility reaches assembly complete
W““°“9""°“‘°‘ ’ in the year 2010, over 18 nations will be involved in
C .. I B the program. A major step in completing 188 was the
ﬁgﬁgszgmnwsw launch of ESA’s Columbus Laboratory Module in
February 2008. The MSG facility was one of the first
, US racks moved to the Columbus Module in March
Flgure 9' IVGEN Hardware. 2008. The MSG occupies a US rack location in the

With N AS A’s desire to return to the Moon and to Columbus Module and continues to be integrated and
extend manned exploration missions to Mars, there is operated as a US resource. AS describedtin thls
an increased likelihood of a mishap and/or medical p?pCf, the MSG faClllty has tremendous capability for
emergency. With a focus on minimizing up—mass for Video observation of payload operation, containment
exploration missions, it is desirable to have a system 0f hazardous materials, data downlink and storage,
onboard that will produce intravenous (IV) solutions and remote COmmandlng 0f payloacl hardware in the
as needed rather than ﬂying large quantities of pre— MSG work Yélume- Wlth these unique capabilities,
made IV solutions that have a limited shelf life. the MSG fac1lity is well pos1tioned to accommodate a

14

"
"15","Wide variety of national lab payloads. Therefore, the spacecrafts and crew members Will actually
MSG facility is a Vital component of NASA’s Vision experience during space travel and exploration. In
for a National Laboratory in Space. addition, the facility is ideally suited to provide
quick, inexpensive access to space for National Lab
V, Conclusion type investigations that are necessary for
The Mierogravity Science Glovebox (MSG) on understanding the role of gravity in the physics
the International Space Station (188) has been used assoeiated Wlth new research areas.
for a large body of research. The MSG has operated
0n—0rbit for more than 5000 hours performing VI- Acknowledgments
investigations involving material science, thermal The authors would like to thank the members of
management, protein crystal growth, life sciences, the MSG Integration Team for their assistance, and
fire detection, combustion, plant growth, and review of this paper. Specifically, Andrew Tygielski,
technology demonstration. The MSG’s unique Phillip Bryant, Chris Butler, J eff Smith, Mark
design provides two levels of containment to protect Shelton, and Ginger Flores provided invaluable
the ISS crew from hazardous operations. Moreover, information and assistance.
the MSG provides engineers and scientists a platform
for research in an environment similar to the one that VII, References
1 A. Ostrogorsky, “Solidifieation Using A Bafﬂe in Sealed Ampoules,” AIAA—2003—1309, 41st Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, J an. 6—9, 2003
2 Grugel, R., “Toward Understanding Pore Formation and Mobility During Controlled Directional Solidifieation in a
Mierogravity Environment (PFMI),” NASA Marshall Spaceﬂight Center, Huntsville, AL,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIMPFMIhtml
3 Gast, A. P., “Investigating the Structure of Paramagnetie Aggregates from Colloidal Emulsions (InSPACE),”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
URLzhttp ://eXplorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiorﬂInSPACE .html
4 Voorhees, P., “Coarsening in Solid Liquid Mixtures—Z (CSLM—Z)”, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIUCSLM—thml
5 Urban, D., “Smoke and Aerosol Measurement Experiment (SAME)”, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
URL: http://explorati0n.nasa. gOV/pro grams/statiomSAMEhtml
6 Kazuhiko, N. and Takayuki, H., “Cell Wall/Reverse Genetic Approach to Exploring Genes Responsible for Cell
Wall Dynamics in Supporting Tissues of Arabidopsis Under Mierogravity Conditions and Resist Wall/Role 0f
Mierotubule—Membrane—Cell Wall Continuum in Gravity Resistance in Plants (CWRW)”, Tohoku University,
Sendai, J apan.
URL: http://WWW.nasa.gOV/mission pages/statiomsCienee/eXperiments/CWRW.html
7 Hall, N. and McKinley, G., “Shear History Extensional Rheology Experiment (SHERE)”, Glenn Research Center,
Cleveland, OH,
URL: http :// spaceﬂi ghtsystems. gre .nasa. gOV/ Advanced/ISSResearCh/MS G/ S HERE/
8 Froyen, L. “Combustion Synthesis under Mierogravity Conditions (COSMIC),” Department MTM, KULeuven,
Kasteelpark, Arenberg
9 Dubois, F., “Mierogravity Experiment For the Measurement of Diffusion Coefficients in Crude Oil (DCCO),”
Mierogravity Research Center, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.u1b.aC.be/polyteCerC/Instruments DesigWCCO en.htm1
10 Kirsehhook, C., Kremer S., Martens J ., & Pierre J ., “NANOSLAB,” Centre for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis,
K.U. Leuven, URL: http://WWW.energia.ru/englisivenergia/iss/researehes/teehn—17.html
11 Zegers, 1., & Dubois F., “Protein Microscope for the International Space Station (PromISS),” Vrije Universitiet,
Brussel, Belgium, URL: esamultimedia.esa.int/dOCs/odissea/promiss pr 1004.ppt
12 Legros, J .C., & Barremaeeker L., Heat, Euro Heat Pipes S.A., Nivelles, Belgium,
URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiomSEMEZHOXDYD 0.htm1
13 Kroesen, G.M.W., “ARGES—Energy Efficient Lamps for the Future,”, Technical University of Eindhoven,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands, URL: http://WWW.esa.int/SPECIALSH)elta MissiOIUSEM7RWGHZTD 0.html
14 Faeth, G., Smoke Point in Coﬂow Experiment (SPICE), The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
15

"
"16","15 Legros, J .,”Selectable Optics Diagnostics Instrument (SODI),” Microgravity Research Center
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, URL: http://WWW.esteC.esa.nl/spaceﬂight/facilities/diffoil/
16 Kim, J ., “Boiling eXperiment Facility,” University of Maryland, College Park, MD,
URL: httpzllexplorationnasa. gOV/pro grams/statiOIJBXF—MABE.html
17 Dreyer, M., The University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany, and M. Weislogel, M. , Portland State University,
Portland, Oregon, Critical Velocities in Open Capillary Channels (CCF)
18Brown, D., “IntraVenous Fluids GENeration and mixing (IVGEN)”, Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH,
19 B. Boen, “International Space Station Overview,”
URL: httpzllwwwnasa.gOV/mission pages/statiomscience/nlab/indeX.html
16

"
