"","x"
"1","édif Available online at www.sciencedirect.com —
2% ADVANCES IN
N SCIenceDI rect SPACE
ELSEVIER Advances in Space Research 44 (2009) 1382—1391 w
www.elseVier.com/locate/asr
3D information from 2D images recorded in the European
Modular Cultivation System on the ISS
B.G.B. Solheim
Department Of Physics, Norwegian University Of Science and T echnology, N—7491 T rondheim, Norway
Received 3 October 2008; received in revised form 9 July 2009; accepted 10 July 2009
Abstract
The European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) on the ISS allows long—term biological experiments, e.g. on plants. Video cam—
eras provide near real—time 2D images from these experiments. A method to obtain 3D coordinates and stereoscopic images from these
2D images has been developed and is described in this paper. The procedure was developed to enhance the data output of the MUL—
TIGEN—l experiment in 2007. One of the main objectives of the experiment was to study growth movements of the Arabidopsis plants
and the effect of gravity on these. 3D data were important during parts of the experiment and the paper presents the method developed to
acquire 3D data, the accuracy of the data, limitations to the technique and ways to improve the accuracy. Sequences of 3D data obtained
from the MULTIGEN—l experiment are used to illustrate the potential of this newfound capability of the EMCS. In the experiment
setup, a positional depth accuracy of about :|:0.4 mm for relative object distances and an absolute depth accuracy of about :|:1.4 mm
for time dependent phenomena was reached. The ability to both View biological specimens in 3D as well as obtaining quantitative
3D data added greatly to the scientiﬁc output of the MULTIGEN—l experiment. The uses of the technique to other researchers and their
experiments are discussed.
© 2009 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: EMCS; ISS; 3D images; MicrograVity; MULTIGEN—l; Circumnutations
1. Introduction ecotype Columbia wild type. On Earth, such growth move-
ments are nearly ubiquitous in plants and manifest them-
The European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) selves e.g. in the case of the Arabidopsis as spiral
was launched in July 2006 and is now installed and opera- movements of the ﬂower stalks around the plumb line.
tional inside the Columbus module on the International The amplitude can be up to several centimeters in diameter
Space Station, ISS. The EMCS provides a facility in which and a revolution is often completed in 80—90 min (Someya
long term experiments on plants, insects or amphibia can et a1., 2006). Although the movement occurs in three
be performed. The EMCS is a carefully controlled life sup- dimensions, the EMCS, in principle, was only designed to
port system containing two centrifuges which each can allow the recording of 2D images. However, through the
hold four experiment containers (ECs) with an internal vol- process of preparing the experiment it was found that cer-
ume of 60 x 60 x 160 mm (Astrium — EMCS Team, 2001). tain design Characteristics of the EMCS permitted the
Between August and November 2007 the MULTIGEN- extraction of 3D coordinates and the creation of stereo-
1 experiment was performed in the EMCS (J ohnsson et a1., scopic pictures.
2009; Solheim et a1., 2009). One of the main objectives with The EMCS is foreseen to have a long lifetime and be
this experiment was to study the effect of gravity on rota- used in a number of experiments during the coming decade.
tional growth movements (termed “Circumnutations” by We believe the technique described in this paper adds to the
Charles Darwin) in the plant species Arabidopsis thaliana scientiﬁc capabilities of the EMCS and could be of interest
— to a wider audience.
E—mail address: ﬁrma@rte.gs
0273-1177/$36.00 © 2009 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.asr.2009.07.008

"
"2","B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 1382—1391 1383
2. Hardware Hardware modiﬁcations were limited to changes that
could be implemented within the EC volume available for
A combination of hardware and software solutions per- the experiment. No modiﬁcations could be done on the
mitted the extraction of 3D coordinates and the creation of EMCS hardware. Although not required by the calibration
stereoscopic images from the EMCS. For the extraction of software, certain reference marks and structures were
3D coordinates the free (non-commercial use) product placed inside the ECs that aided the evaluation of the
“Camera Calibration Toolbox for Matlab” was used images and the process of creating stereoscopic images. A
(Bouguet, 2008). black and white reference grid was ﬁtted on the back wall
of each EC. In addition, a thin reference pin (height
2.1. EMCS design characteristics that enable 3D extraction 15 mm) was placed close to the centre of the cover lid on
the growth pot (plant cultivation chamber, FCC), and
The EMCS contains two compact rotors that can pro- guide marks indicating a front-to-back 1ine perpendicular
Vide fractional g-levels between 0-g and 2-g. For fuller to the back wall was engraved on the PCC cover 1id.
description of the EMCS general features see Brinckmann The reference grid was printed on 1abe1s provided by the
(2005), Fossum et a1. (2005), Iversen et a1. (2002) and Sol- 188 Payload Label Approval Team (IPLAT) fulﬁlling the
heim et a1. (2006). In the present paper only details con- requirements of the SSP 57000, Appendix C (NASA
cerning the 3D capabilities are presented. report, 2000). The grid consisted of a pattern with charac-
Each rotor holds four ECs and two CCD NTSC Video teristics that made it possible to identify the Viewing loca-
cameras (Sony FCB-IX470). As shown in the schematic tion regardless of zoom level used. When a large amount
Fig. 1, two ECs share one Video camera; therefore only of zoom is used the depth-of—ﬁeld is severely limited. To
two ECs on each rotor can be Viewed simultaneously. In preserve the ability to resolve the grid lines in this situation,
the process of designing a compact system on each rotor, the grid consisted of lines of 1.3 mm width.
a mirror has been placed in the light path between the Two conﬁgurations of the PCCs were created; with
ECs and the Video cameras (Fig. 1b). The Video cameras either 3 or 5 seed holes (four ECs each).
automatically reverse the mirror image caused by Viewing The location of the seed holes on the PCC was chosen so
the EC Via a mirror, so that it appears as if no mirror that they remained Visible from a11three angles from which
was in the light path. When the user wishes to observe a images were captured.
certain part of the EC, this is done by either panning the
camera (Fig. 1a); the View ti1ts on the radial aXis of the 2.2. Diﬂerem EMCS models
rotor, or by rotating the mirror (Fig. 1b), which results in
a perceived panning of the camera (the View of the EC The EMCS consists of a ﬂight model (FM) that is
shifts on an aXis perpendicular to the radial direction). located on the 188, a ground based identical unit, the engi-
However, by rotating the mirror one does not only change neering model (EM), and the ground based experiment ref-
the section of the EC observed, it also results in a small erence model (ERM). The ERM differs in design from the
change in Viewing angle. It is this system characteristic that EM and FM since ground based testing and experiments
permits both the extraction of 3D coordinates and the cre- have to work under 1-g conditions. Also, and relevant to
ation of stereoscopic images. this paper, the cameras in the ERM are pointed directly
towards the EC (with no mirror in the light path), thus
the ability to markedly change the Viewing angle as seen
(a) (b) in the FM and EM does not eXist. The techniques described
_ _ in this paper can therefore not be used in the ERM.
Top view of rotor Side View of rotor
— C39 3. Methods
ITI 0)
O ’9
‘$ Mirror )7?th 3.1. Anaglyphs
""jigs: EC I I I Camera An anaglyph is a stereoscopic picture which consists of
t} 0 two images taken from two slightly different angles, layered
’ a on top of each other with a slight offset, and in two comple-
O Q mentary (opposite) colours. The method of creating ana-
$°27 i glyphs is well known, and details presented here will only
be speciﬁc for the EMCS. In the MULTIGEN-l experi-
Fig. 1. Schematic top (a) and side View (b) of one of the rotors in the ment images were recorded from angles 1 t0 3’ angle 1
EMCS. One camera is shared by two ECs (location ofmirrornot shown in d 3 bein se arated b a mirror rotation Of 6.80. This
(a)). Inset (b) shows the mirror which is located in the light path from the an g . p y . .
EC to the camera. It is the rotation of the mirror that permits 3D angle separation was used for the eXtraCtlon Of 3 D 6‘00le-
coordinates to be extracted. The dotted circles indicate the available ”0165- Angle 1 and 2 W33 S€parat€d by a mirror YOtatiOH 0f
rotation axis. 3.80, and used exclusively for the creation of anaglyphs.

"
"3","1384 B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 1382—1391
However, all three positions can be used when creating noting that there exist two sets of X - Y- and Z— coordinates,
anaglyphs. one set calculated for each camera angle. Both sets describe
In the EMCS, the rotary drives (type: MM-3M-R, the same scene, but are projected relative to the two camera
National Aperture, Inc.) which turn the mirrors have a eer- angles respectively.
tain amount of play. This prevents the mirrors from return- The method employed by the Camera Calibration Tool-
ing accurately and repeatedly to a certain position when box to map the environment, in our case the EC, is by
moved (further details in Section 3.2.3). If creating only a recording multiple images of an object with known dimen-
single anaglyph, the play in the mirrors is of minor impor- sions as it is moved throughout the EC. The Toolbox then
tanee. However, when dynamic growth processes are inves- relates what has been seen from one ﬁxed Viewing angle to
tigated and a sequence of anaglyph images should be what is seen from another one. When the relationship
created and Viewed as a movie, the play or jitter of the rnir- between these Viewing angles are known, it is possible to
ror makes it difﬁcult to analyze and interpret the sequence. calculate the positions of different parts of the object , as
Therefore, to improve the image quality, Matlab scripts well as of all other objects seen by the cameras.
that removed the apparent jitter in the images were created The calibration procedure consisted of recording images
in the MULTIGEN—l experiment. By identifying an area of a Checkerboard pattern from two different Viewing
of the image that should appear ﬁxed in 2D coordinate angles (Fig. 2). In the EMCS ease, the two Viewing angles
space, image correlation methods were used to determine were Chosen in a compromise between obtaining a maxi-
the necessary horizontal or vertical shift of the whole image mum angle separation and keeping the area of interest in
to create the illusion of a static background in the images. the EC in View from both angles. In the present paper a
This method does not remove the actual inaccuracy created zoom level that shows the entire height of the growth vol-
by the jitter (i.e. the slight Change in Viewing angle which is ume of the EC was used during the calibration.
the result of not consistently returning to the same rnirror
position), but it produces an image sequence in which the
background appears static and therefore the moving :3; ea: 1
objects in the image are easier to follow. w: _I _ mm
3.2. Posztzomng m 3D ."". . l .‘.‘. J . l
l”. . ~ '1!- .
3.2.]. Extraction of 2D coordinate positions W15 [.31 g .. #5:! L153}: /
The starting point for any analysis is to extract the 2D Imam: F7"")? ‘ .133wa 1‘""?
coordinates (i.e. the x and )2 pixel position) for the object '1‘ “H. 1“ ‘ ""’“iqﬂi”;
that one wishes to track, and this is done from two different ' I ‘
angles. In the MULTIGEN—l experiment the focus was on
tracking the position of the inﬂorescence stems of the plant ‘ _ ‘
species used. When considering the uniqueness of the col- ‘
leeted image material and the requirements for accuracy, .
only computer assisted manual extraction of the 2D eoor- ’1‘,- _ -...3‘, f - . n.“
dinates was determined to give the accuracy required. ,
3.2.2. Extraction of 3D coordinates — calibration ‘ a
In order to extract 3D coordinates a calibration of the . ﬂ » : ‘
camera system has to be performed. The “Camera Calibra- f é' .‘ "" '
tion Toolbox” for Matlab developed by Bouguet (Bouguet, ‘ ‘ :,..':- y / :-
2008) was used. The calibration procedure permits the soft- 5/ .. r. 51.5. s
ware to map the intrinsic and extrinsic Characteristics of the r ’ l 73'
cameras and hardware setup used, as well as the position of ' ‘ ""~41“ , r
the right camera with respect to the left camera Via rotation d -
and translation vectors between the two earnera-positions ‘
used in the stereo calibration. The result is a model that
transforms the two coordinate pairs (x- and y-eoordinates
in pixels from two angles) described in the previous subsec-
tion, to a set Of 3D coordinates in millimeters (X , Yand Z) Fig. 2. Checkerboard calibrating procedure of camera. The camera was
where the new Z-Coordinates 110W describes the distance aligned to match the output from the ﬂight images fromttwto angles (top
from the cameras. “Cameras” are used in plural even if insets) andaeheckterboard calibration pattern was placerl 1ns1de one of the
. . . ECs. The calibration pattern was moved 30 times 1ns1de the entire EC
only 0116 camera has taken the images Since the mlrror growth volume and was recorded from the two angles for each new
YOtatiOH causes the Camera Calibration TOOIbOX to position (top part of ﬁgure). The lower image shows the process of
perceive the images as taken by two cameras. It is worth adjusting the calibration pattern.

"
"4","B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 1382—1391 1385
In Fig. 3 a ﬂow Chart describing the steps of the oalibra- the EM for each angle and for each Checkerboard position.
tion is shown. The lettering A, B, C, etc. describes the nec- Between each image recorded the mirror was rotated to the
essary steps in a Chronological order and are used below to maximum angle allowed by the hardware before being
simplify the understanding of the calibration process. returned, always from the same direction, to the angle used
In principle, the engineering model (EM) and the ﬂight for recording the calibration image. A total of 30 diﬂerent
model (FM) of the EMCS should be identical. However, checkerboard positions were recorded from two angles in
a certain set point angle of the mirror in the FM did not addition to images of a calibration reference unit that
result in the same Viewing angle in the EM. This diﬂerenoe allows the veriﬁcation of the accuracy of the calibration.
combined with the play in the mirrors resulted in a calibra- From this pool of images it was possible to match 11 pairs
tion that had to be performed post-ﬂight, when actual that were to be used for the calibration (Fig. 3C). The
ﬂight images from the 188 were available (Fig. 3A). Post- Camera Calibration Toolbox software (Fig. 3D) provides
ﬂight the user has a large number of images, and the mirror a standardized method of calibrating the camera system,
inaccuracy is most easily observed as a perceived move- and details regarding procedures which are not speciﬁc to
ment of the reference grid in the back of the EC. A data- the EMCS are therefore not discussed here.
base of the FM images determining the position of the
grid in each image was created. Based on the largest statis- 3.2.2.1. Accuracy of calibration. A calibration veriﬁcation
tioal occurrence of a grid position, an image from the left unit that consisted of structures with known dimensions
and right Viewing angle in the FM was then selected to and positions was built to provide a target for measuring
be used as reference images and the basis for the calibration the accuracy of the calibration. This was achieved by a
procedure in the EM. Using these two images, the camera comparison between calculated distances on the calibration
and the mirror in the EM have to be manually adjusted so veriﬁcation unit and actually measured distances on this
that the output images (from the EM) comprise the best reference unit (Fig. 4). One pair of images of the reference
match possible to the reference images from the FM unit, selected as the best match to the 11 pairs used for the
(Fig. 3B). calibration procedure, was used as the basis for this test.
The amount of play in the mirror in the FM was not 2D coordinates of various locations on the pair of reference
identical to that of the EM; the EM has more jitter. To unit images were obtained (Fig. 3E), and 3D coordinates
increase the probability of getting a good match between were calculated using the Camera Calibration Toolbox
the EM and FM image, three images were recorded in software.
The distances given in Table 1 were measured with
respect to the millimeter sheet attached to the back wall
(A) of the calibration reference unit as seen in the perspective
FM camera View in Fig. 4. In other words, the measured or calculated
distance was the distance from the millimeter sheet to, e.g.
D FMimages (F) (_G) one of the pins in the unit. When there was a discrepancy
a b a..... 0033733. Cfoﬁggi'gﬁfe 0’3th between the distance from the top of a .pin ancI the bottom
mlrroX X, y, translation X} Y}:.Z of a pin to the back wall, the average distance is presented.
b Xi y: andscciirgfgt'on XbeIt/(SZ b This was applied to both the calculated and measured val-
etc. ues. The vertical pins in the calibration reference unit have
a diameter of 1 mm.
3_D stereo Calib. unit With the exception of the location 1 anomaly (Table 1),
rotation and coqrqs._ the calculated distances are consistently shorter than the
”8:72,:ng for Vignyft'on measured distances with 1.1 mm (disregarding the location
X’2y’2 1 anomaly). The calculated distances in the Z—direction
_ etC- have to be corrected (again disregarding the location 1
Paired . . .
images: anomaly) With this amount to get the phys1oa11y measured
0173028- caclfbnpaiirgn Sjrliiftigiig: distances. With this correction, the RMS value for the
' toolboxin unitin EC accuracy in the Z-direction (1.e. depth) between objects. is
Matlab inside EM 0.4 mm. In some of the transparent EC covers areas With
Q fa (C) (D) (E) a slight optical distortion have been observed. This could
poss1b1y reduce the accuracy locally in some areas of the
\b”':l:l 1:13'“/ image. The location 1 anomaly could therefore be the result
3 EM camera EM camera of refraction changes in the EC cover.
(B) The above results represent the accuracy when one
Fig. 3. Flow chart describing steps in the calibration procedure. The WISheS to Study Objects relatlve t0 eaCh Oiher’ 1.6. nOt time
lettering A, B, C, etc. shows the chronological order in which the various dependent p henomenon' Above’ all locatlons are eXtraCted
steps in the procedure are performed. These various steps are described in from a single set (3 pail“) 0f images. 111 the MULTIGEN'I
detail in the text. experiment, a time dependent phenomenon was studied,

"
"5","1386 B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 1382—1391
- ”22:235.“ 5:52:
. ‘ 4i ' ,.
. ' .i'"" f T 7'
ll xfizjf ’t 4.
* .. . 1 t I”
g
. *rw ‘
"" ‘T%%=== . . E
' ' _. , E 30
. I £12 20
* ‘ ' ‘P
/ "" >' 10 \ ‘
10 20 30
‘ Z-axis [mm]
Fig. 4. Calibration unit used to verify accuracy of the calibration procedure. Calibration unit is shown in the top left photo (the round box in the photo
just supports the calibration model). The top right image shows the position of the location markers used to check the distance accuracy of the calibration.
Below right, an outline of the pins in the model has been calculated and the 3D plot of the vectors is presented (horizontally aligned to the side View of the
model above). Due to low contrast where the pins are attached to the surface, not all pins were measured down to their lowest attachment points.
Tablel Fig. 5 illustrates the inaccuracies for the encountered
Calibration of distances. Distances measured for a physical calibration X.’ y. and Z—determinations. Each Of the plotted curves
EEEEWZLCEEPE? etsobgg::‘:‘:i;:1::ﬁ:g :3] lmeans Of the callbratlon represents a ﬁxed target inside the EC, and the calculated
A coordinates for each of the curves should therefore be iden-
(LFOicatélI-Otii ht galculated 2465511er Dlscrepancy tieal in the successive determinations. In other words, the
w results in Fig. 5 should have been straight, horizontal lines
; 3: i2? 41)? if no inaccuracies were present due to mechanical play, etc.
3 19:3 20' —0.7 The Z-axis is deﬁned as the lens axis, i.e. the Viewing
4 8.3 9.3 _1 direction of the camera and is naturally thought of as the
5 23.6 25.4 —1.8 “depth-axis” in this paper (thus the Z-aXis is not necessarily
6 25-2 26-3 —1-1 perpendicular to the reference grid in the back of the EC
since the Z-aXis is aligned to the direction in which the cam-
and therefore the coordinates were extracted from a series era is pointing). In the upper part of Fig. 5 the Z-eoordinates
of sequentially recorded images. In this situation, the play for a ﬁxed position close to the front of the EC and for
in the mirror will reduce the accuracy further. In addition, another position on the reference grid in the back of the
the time delay between the recording of each of the two EC, respectively, are plotted successively. The X- and Y-aXis
angles will have to be compensated. are the horizontal and vertical axis perpendicular to the lens
axis, respectively, and are plotted in the lower part of Fig. 5.
3.2.3. Play in mirror From the ﬁgure it is seen different levels of accuracy
If one assumed that the calibration model was 100% COI- exist for different directions, since the scatter round the
reet, the jitter in the mirrors in the FM would still intro- average position value is different. For instance, the single
duee inaccuracies in the positioning of objects inside the largest difference for the 3D coordinates calculated between
EC. This inaccuracy is difﬁcult to compensate, because a two pairs of adjacent images in the sequence is 0.5 mm for
change in mirror position also involves a slight Change in the X-axis, 0.09 mm for the Y-axis and 2.83 mm for the Z-
VieWing angle. This Change in Viewing angle iS not a simple axis. The distribution of calculated values around the ﬁxed
horizontal or vertical shift. The angles and locations for all target is largest for the Z-axis, The standard deviation is
positions within the EC Change according to the rules of 0,28, 0,04 and 1,4 mm for the X, Y and Z-eoordinates,
perspective. Within the time and resources available it respectively (standard errors with n = 47 0.041, 0.006 and
was not possible to further penetrate this question. With- 0203 mm, respectively). In other words, in order to over-
out compensation, the jitter results in reduced accuracy come (with aeertain probability) the inaccuracy introduced
and consequently a larger movements of an object is by the play in the mirror an object has to move longer in
required to be detected and positioned. the Z-direetion than in the two other directions.

"
"6","B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 1382—1391 1387
Fixed target positional error
242 a 200 40-5 L
E .4. A .A. 9 m
we +¢4AASE 53 9% 93
E m 240 .4 “A A A. x 2. 4.; 198 g .
3% 4Hiﬁi 2544119 :4i 8?
s “T A. A n x <2 g
3? 238 A MAA.’ Am ‘A‘ 4.4 196 Bo
E E A” A: X “A 8 LU
e g x x .2 ‘5
“q: UJ 236 194 E E
o u— o o
c O H: .t
S x CD (D
g g 234 192 o E
D .Q g <5
2 E E
232 190 D
8 _ ooooooooooo- .o oo ,o o o. 00 .000 o
q. E 000 0* '0' ‘o 000 'o .0 OoO. .- O ‘00 .0 oo
o E o o o o
f) I—l
cu N.
.0 O
' C?
L .E
g 0
cv 3
>_ (D
x
E .2
<5 |—
X
0 10 2o 30 4o
Chronological image sequence
Fig. 5. Coordinate deviations. Due to the play in the mirrors, the calculation of a ﬁxed target position does not produce identical values when repeated.
Sequences of images providing the data are from the ﬂight model on the space station. The top plot shows the Z-coordinates (“depth”) for a ﬁxed position
on the back wall of the EC (A) and for a ﬁxed position close to the front of the EC (I). The bottom plot shows the X - and Y-coordinates (O and 0,
respectively) for the ﬁxed position on the back wall of the EC.

The Z-Coordinates in Fig. 5 also exempliﬁes the difﬁculties The ﬁxed target errors observed in the determinations of
with pinpointing a certain position in the images. A factor the front and back position should remain in phase, with
that directly inﬂuences this is the high JPEG compression the front position having the least error and the back posi-
used for the images. Because of a combination of the limited tion the largest one. The upper panel of Fig. 5 shows that
downlink bandwidth available (about 5 kb/s) and the num- the front and back errors remain mostly in sync, but that
her of images recorded, it becomes anecessity to use strong there exist also out of phase errors, which can only be
JPEG compression. The reference grid in the back of the attributed to errors made when pinpointing the target
ECs consists of clear white lines on a black background. location.

However, when the recorded image is displayed, a colour

gradient is seen in the transition from white to black, i.e. it 3.2.4. Compensation of delay between recordings

is not an instantaneous transition from white to black pixels. In the 3D experiment a set of three images was recorded
The exactlocation of this gradient is furtherinﬂuenced by the every 5 min for the three angles 1—3. The time delay
high JPEG compression used. The compression adds arte- between recording angle 1 and angle 2 was between 42
facts which are seen as blocks surrounding contrasting fea- and 61 s and between recording angle 1 and angle 3 from
tures in the image. The result is that it can be difﬁcult to 85 to 120 s. The variation is due to a range of EMCS sched-
exactly determine the coordinates for a certain position over ules operating at different times. During an 85—120 s inter-
a series of images. From Fig. 5 it is seen that the Z-Coordi- val, the ﬂower stalk or side stems that are tracked, could
nates also are the most sensitive to such inaccuracy, e.g. a move up to a few millimeters. Without compensation, this
1 pixel position error translates to a larger Z—position change sampling time error would lead to additional uncertainties
than for the X- and Y-Coordinates. in 3D positioning. Matlab scripts were, therefore, created

"
"7","1388 B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 1382—1391
’ anaglyph images will therefore contain an undeﬁned Visual
a R r"" inaccuracy in the position of the tracked object. However,
.\ + | in the present experiment, it was only in one case with a
.- .‘ .-' .. side stem having extremely Vivid movements that it made
* s , a noticeable change in the 3D coordinates when corrections
‘\ were made.
.) I
‘ ‘ 4. Results
\. The MULTIGEN-l experiment resulted in more than
, 30,000 recorded images of growing plants in space. For
, 1;.- ‘;'~,.‘ M ”'01 m u. ‘_ N the ﬁrst time nearly the entire life span of Arabidopsis
"" ‘ was shot in high-frequeney time lapse recordings in space.
I The vast majority of the recorded images are in 2D. The
I 3D technique was considered experimental, and was there-
“ , ‘ 33‘ I fore limited to only a few select sequences where 2D
1"" - - - "" ' V recordings already had secured images for analysis. Below
7 \ . ‘ we will concentrate on presenting and discussing results
N‘ I; i ii i ! utilizing the 3D technique.
_ l. g 4.1. Anaglyphs
‘ ~ ~ I "" ‘ In Fig. 6a an anaglyph that includes the early signs of
Fig. 6. Two anaglyphs of a plant created from experimental, space station the emerging ﬂower Stalk is Shown: the arrow demonStrat'
data. The left image (a) shows the Arabidopsis plant when the ﬁrst signs of ing its position. Fig. 6b illustrates an anaglyph Of the same
the emerging ﬂower stalk became Visible under microgravity (indicated by plant 6 days later. The 3D data for the three lowest side
arrow). The image to the. right (b) shows the same plant under l-g but 6 stems are presented in Fig. 8 below.
days later (infrared illumination).
4.1.]. 3D coordinates
to correct this potential error (Fig. 3F). On the basis of the Fig. 7 shows position data for the 3D movements of the
2D position in two subsequent images (for one and the tip of one of the side stems (data for the side stem down on
same angle), the scripts interpolated linearly to the position the right side in Fig. 6b). The tip of the stem was spiralling
of the object when the other (or ﬁrst) angle was recorded. and the presented Z—ooordinate plotted versus the X-eoor-
The coordinates were adjusted accordingly. dinate is, therefore, changing in an oscillatory fashion. The
In the ease of the anaglyph images, see Section 3.1, no left of the two insets presents the originally calculated posi-
simple method exists to compensate this possible positional tional data, while the right one shows the results after oom-
inaocuracy. The Viewing of fast moving objects in the pensation of the time delay (85—120 s) between the two
Movements, uncorrected and corrected for time delay
25
20
E
E
E 15
E 10
O
8
N 5
0
X-coordinates [tick spacing 5 mm]
Fig. 7. Original data (left) and time delay compensated data (right). Tip movement data from the lower right side shoot shown in Fig. 6b. The time delay
of 85—120 s between two recording angles, necessary for 3D coordinate extraction, creates a positioning error for moving objects. That error can be
compensated through linear interpolation of the position data for the target.

"
"8","B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 ( 2009 ) 1382—1391 1389
Extracted 3-D coordinates for side stems
Projected top and perspective view of rotational growth movements
Original data (time compensated) Moving average (zero phase shift) data Perspective view of left side stem
40 (a) (b) _ (c)
E
~ é a;
a t . g 4 e -_ -- ,_V_
“(6 20 ¢ 8 3 -~ .,
.5 ¢ ‘9 2 .
'9 i > .
8 7./ 7% 4
9 10 ¢ ‘2) 6 2 .
. “ts s ~
0 g 996 8 '12
/ m 10 10
g 6;; 7 6 8
3/ 12 2 4 d-mates \mml
X-coordinates [tick spacing 10 mm] Z'Goor
Fig. 8. Projected Views of tip movements of a plant shoot. (a) The calculated, time delay compensated positional data for shoots in Fig. 6(b) through a
230 min image sequence. (b) The same data ﬁltered with a moving average ﬁlter as described in the text. The data are processed ﬁrst in the forward
direction then in the reverse direction resulting in zero phase shift. (0) A perspective View of one of the side stems (processed with the moving average ﬁlter).
Arrows indicate movement direction.
camera angles used in the 3D recordings (Section 3.2.4). 5.]. Camera system calibration
The plant tip is moving rapidly and the uncorrected inset
is therefore ridden with errors. The single largest challenge to be overcome, or at least
In Fig. 8 the tip movements of three of the side stems be quantiﬁed, in the process of exploring the 3D capabil-
(same plant; acceleration about 1 g) are plotted over a per- ity of the EMCS was the play in the mirrors. To minimize
iod of 230 min. The insets show projected top down Views the play it was attempted as mentioned above, to always
and data are time delay compensated. Fig. 8a depicts three move the mirror to its rotation end position before
tip movements in the correct relative position with respect returning to the set point angle. This was tried out from
to each other. In (b) the same data are shown with a stan- both the clockwise and counter-clockwise end position,
dard moving average ﬁlter [14, 1/2, 1Adapplied. The displayed but no improvement in accuracy could be measured as
data have zero phase shift accomplished by using the “ﬁlt- compared with a single move of the mirror back and
ﬁlt” command in Matlab that processes the data both in forth between the three angles used in the experiment.
the forward and then in the reverse direction. To reduce In addition, there was a large difference in the play
end effects data are extrapolated at the end and the begin- observed in the FM and EM.
ning of the sequence using a reﬂection method. This pad- The camera calibration is based on an assumption (from
ding is removed after ﬁltering. the software) that the two cameras are stationary and that
Of the three side tip movements presented, the top right only objects within the scene are able to move. In the case
one spirals in a Clockwise direction while the two other side of the EMCS this assumption is no longer valid due to the
stems display counter-clockwise movements. The available mirror inaccuracy. The reference grid/marks and pins
3D coordinates allow of course the plots to be Viewed from added to the EC aimed at compensating this inaccuracy.
any angle, and an example showing the spiral movement The relative position of these objects with respect to the ref-
for one of these side stems can Clearly be seen in Fig. 80. erence grid in the back was thought to make it possible to
compensate the play. The reference pin was limited to a
5. Discussion and recommendations height of 15 mm to avoid interference with the growing
plants but the height proved to be inadequate since the
The results show that it is possible to both extract 3D plant presented in this paper blocked the View of the pin.
coordinates and produce anaglyphs in experiments run in In addition, the View of the engraved line proved difﬁcult
the EMCS. The technique added great scientiﬁc value to to utilize due to a combination of light reﬂections and
the MULTIGEN-l experiment (Johnsson et al., 2009; 801- the positions of the leaves. Within the resource constraints
heim et al., 2009). Through the rapid creation of an ana- of the project, a satisfactory method to completely com-
glyph image, various plant parts could be separated from pensate the inaccuracy introduced by the play in the mirror
each other in the experiment, a feature that at one point was not found. However, in the context of the MULTI-
was critical for the continuation of the experiment by prov- GEN-l experiment, and as seen from Figs. 5 and 8, this
ing that a ﬂower stalk was emerging, Cf. Fig. 6a. error did not present a major problem to the analysis.

"
"9","1390 B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 1382—1391
Improvements for a future experiment could include [14, 1/2, 1Ad-ﬁlter would result in zero output for a sine wave
several reference pins but possibly higher and positioned with a period of 10 minutes, but for the present results with
Closer the edges of the EC volume. Another possibility to much slower plant movements this has no consequence.
be explored would be to include markings on the EC trans-
parent cover, but the limited depth of ﬁeld when using any 5.4. Accuracy of calibration
amount of zoom beyond seeing the entire EC, could then
present a problem. This paper is based on the use of a zoom setting where
the entire EC growth volume is Visible, i.e. the upper
5.2. Sampling frequency 117 mm of the EC. The cameras in the EMCS are capable
of providing higher resolution by zooming Closer to the
The sampling time is of interest when it comes to the objects. Speciﬁcations show a resolution capability of
determination of the 3D coordinates of moving objects. 0.1mm at maximum level of zoom in daylight (EMCS
Using a “set of images” to denote the recording of angle Design Report — CDR, 2001). However, the reported mag-
1—3 in rapid succession it is clear that a certain Atime must nitude of the mirror inaccuracy is unaffected when Viewing
exist until a new set of images is sampled. An option to the EC at the maximum zoom level. Viewing the EC with
increase accuracy would be to minimize Atime. The error high magniﬁcation results in images that show a larger
seen in Fig. 5 may not be reduced, but the uncertainty in Apixels per “mm grid in the back of the EC” movement
position of an object within the EC may be reduced in this ratio, i.e. the effect of the mirror jitter is magniﬁed. In
way. In practise, taking all EMCS operational aspects into the context of the MULTIGEN-l experiment this zoom
account, Atime could possibly be reduced to around 2 min setting was only used for the creation of anaglyphs, not
if only one EC was to be observed from two angles, as for the extraction of 3D coordinates. Calibration of this
opposed to the 5 min sampling interval used for the results setting was therefore not carried through, but as long as
presented here. Photographing one EC on each rotor the play in the mirror is uncorrected, it is reasonable to
would require the Atime to be about 4 min (Aanes, G., assume that the accuracy limits seen in Fig. 5 are of the cor-
pers. comm.). Finally, many phenomena including the rect magnitude. However, due to the larger resolution, the
growth movements are not random in nature; they contain larger Apixels/mm ratio would reduce the error created by
a trend. In the case of the Arabidopsis growth movements any inability to accurately place the coordinates on the
in 1-g there is a movement in a Clockwise or counter-Cloek- tracked target.
wise direction which becomes Visible over a sequence of
images due to trend displayed over time, even if the move- 5.5. Near real time 3D data acquisition
ment between two sets of images is less than the maximum
error reported. The calibration for the MULTIGEN-l experiment was
If the sampling frequency is at the maximum allowed by performed post-ﬂight due to the differences between the
the EMCS, and no method is applied to compensate for the ground-based EM and the space based FM. Such a post-
mirror inaccuracy, a limitation to the technique would ﬂight calibration would be a limitation if an experiment
present itself when studying low amplitude random like required 3D-Coordinates to be extracted in near real time.
movement. In this situation, movements below the error However, as the statistical analysis of the FM jitter in
limits would not be possible to distinguish from the error Fig. 5 showed, the play appeared rather well behaved with-
introduced by the mirror play. In the particular case of out major spikes. It should therefore be possible for a
the MULTIGEN—l experiment this was Close to the situa- future experiment to collect 3D images at the start of the
tion observed for the O-g movement of the stalk and side experiment in the FM, analyze a set of them to determine
stems. In O-g, analysis was therefore limited to 2D observa- the probable error limits and perform the calibration in
tions where only the x- and y-aXis amplitudes of the move- an EM while the experiment is running on the 188, thus
ment were recorded. obtaining high quality 3D data in near real time.
5.3. Filtering the data 5.6. Expanding the capabilities of the EMCS
In Fig. 8b the data are ﬁltered by a moving average ﬁl- The MULTIGEN—l experiment was a long-term exper-
ter. It could be argued that this presentation lies Closer to iment that in itself stresses any hard- and software. Adding
the actual movement of the side stems than the original the third dimension to the experiment pushed the hardware
data (but time delay compensated). By digitally ﬁltering towards its limit. It should be kept in mind that the EMCS
the data with a moving average ﬁlter of suitable band- was neverintended or designed for the use presented in this
width, sudden spikes introduced by a jump in mirror posi- paper, but the fact that it could be used in a completely new
tion would be smoothed out. Arguably, some resolution is way, not planned in the design phase, shows the ﬂexibility
lost in the process, but when comparing the two versions of the system.
one observes that both the magnitude and direction of The two 3D outputs discussed in this paper complement
the motion are well preserved. It is worth noting that a each other. Anaglyphs are useful for Visual inspection,

"
"10","B.G.B. Solheim/Advances in Space Research 44 { 2009 ) 1382—1391 1391
either as a single image that can help e.g. the determination The 3D capabilities of the EMCS developed here could
of the position of leaves or as a movie sequence to deter- become a valuable tool for experiment teams performing
mine the direction and size of motion. The ability to extract future experiments in the EMCS. This ability to provide
3D coordinates quantiﬁes what is seen in the anaglyphs and a more ground based lab experience as well as the ability
could be needed for the end product of the experiment. to quantify what is seen in 3D coordinates should add sci-

Extraction of 3D coordinates is potentially useful in many entiﬁc value to several types of experiments in the EMCS.
types of experiments. It can be used to obtain inter-object
distances from the same point in time, or to study an evolving
phenomenon over time. In the ﬁrst case, higher position Acknowledgments
accuracy is obtained, and the calibrated position accuracy .
between objects inside the EC (using a zoom level where The author w1shes to thank the staff at the NfUSQC fer
the entire growth volume in the EC is Visible) is about the support when developing the method described in this
0.4 mm in the Z-direction. However, it is quite possible that paper. Ah personnel at N'USOC haye at one time or the
the accuracy is better since the pins in the calibration veriﬁ- other contributed. towards making It poss1ble to enable
cation unit had a diameter of 1 mm. When determining the the 3D functionality Of the EMCS-

x- and y-eoordinates for the pins from the two camera angles A1309 the author would. Wish to thank the IOT personnel
it was found that it could be difﬁcult to exactly pinpoint the at EADS Astrium at Friedrichshafen and espeeially Dr.
same location due to curvature of the surfaces. A smaller Wolfgang Seheller that helped With initial testing that con-
diameter would improve accuracy. ﬁrmed the 3D capability of the EMCS. Also ESA, Dr.

In the ease of the time dependent phenomena, the preei- Claude A. Brillouet and Dr. UlI'ICh Kﬁebler are gratefully
sion is limited by the mirror accuracy. To get an estimate acknowledged.
of the minimum movements possible to record with a certain Speeial thanks go to my collaborators and doctoral
probability, repeated imaging with the aetualniirror system superV1sors Prof. Tor-Henning Iversen and Prof. Anders
is necessary, as discussed in relation to Fig. 5. However, as Johnsson. Gratefully acknowledged is 3.130. Prof. Johns-
seen, by decreasing the time period between two sets of son’s valuable support and d1scuss1ons Within ﬁelds of his
images, the effects of the play on position accuracy can be speeiality.
reduced as is also the case for phenomena which show a slow
trend (like the plant movements studied in the present paper) References
with just small average movements from image to image.

During the MULTIGEN'I experimeht the leaves Of the Astrium — EMCS Team, OHB, Verhaert, Ferrari and CCM. EMCS
Arabidopsis plant was also the subject of the study (Solheim Design Report _ CDR. Doc. No. EMCS—TN-OOO0-031_DOR, Ami-
et al., 2009). The periodicities of the movements of the um. 19.07.2001.
leaves were quantiﬁed. These movements are predomi- Bouguet, J.Y. Canaera calibration toolbox.f0r.Matlab. Available from:
nantly up-down movements and a 3D extraction 0 f COOI‘di- t<http://www.V1s10n.caltech.edu/bouguetJ/calib_doc/>, August 20-08.

, , , , Brinckmann, E. ESA hardware for plant research on the International
nates was not carried out. The ability to detect high Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 36 (7), 1162—1166, 2005.
fquUGIle mOV€mCIltS WOUld haVG been 1118.8de by thC mil“ Fossum, K.R., Kittang, A.I., Iversen, T.H., Brinckmann, E., Schiller, P.
ror inaccuracy, However’ the ability to create anaglyphs Testing the European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) for ISS
proved to be very useful. The relatively lOW resolution giarzittmalndzgglsl research. SAE Technical Paper Series. Doc. No. 2005-
(0'38 Mpixels) 10W contra“ Images ,Often made It dlﬂicult Iversen, T.I,{., Fossum, K.R., Svare, H., Johnsson, A., Schiller, P. Plant
to separate the leaves and their relative pos1t10n from each growth using EMCS hardware on the ISS. J. Gravit. Physiol. 9 (1),
other. When Viewing the same images in 3D it often P223—P224, 2002,
became a simple task to make such distinctions_ Johnsson, A., Solheim, B.G.B., Iversen, T.-H. Gravity ampliﬁes and
Performing any experiment on the ISS is a complex Eiserl‘t’giamy decreases Cireumntuittéonsetlln31mg??? $311233 333151953
- - - - 11er111218 aceexerimn. . — .
undei‘taking atld the methOdS dlﬂer Signiﬁcantly from p C“ NASA report, ISS leressuriIZDed Pjyload I‘hterfhce Requireihent Dociiment,
forming experiments in a ground based laboratory. In the SSP-57000-Rev E, November 1, 2000.
08.86 Of thC EMCS, thC 11861” has only 8.00688 to inOl‘matiOn Solheim, B.G.B., Johnsson, A., Iversen, T.-H. Ultradian rhythms in
that can be conveyed through an analog NTSC video eam- Arabidopsis thaliana leaves in microgravity. New Phytol. 183 (4), 1043—
era and a range of sensor data. The hands-on feeling is lost. 1952: 2009- _
It was the experience Of the MULTIGEN-team that the Solheim,.B.G.B., Kittang, A.I., Iversen, T.H., Johnsson, A. Preparatory

, , , , , , experiments for long-term observation of Arabzdapszs Circumnutations
ability to View the content of the EC in three d1n1ens1ons in microgravity. Acta Astronaut. 59 (1-5), 46—53, 2006.
helped bridge this gap. The EC could be iHSpected in much Someya, N., Niinuma, K., Kimura, M., Yamaguchi, 1., Hamamoto, H.
same way as one would inspect the contents of the EC Circumnutation of Arabidopsis thaliana inﬂorescence stems. Biol.
placed in a ground based laboratory. Plant 50 (2): 287—290: 2006-

"
