"","x"
"1","— RESEARCH ARTICLE

Low Back Pam In Microg raVIty and Bed Rest Studies

Annelies L. PooI—Goudzwaard; Daniel L. Belavy; Julie A. Hides; Carolyn A. Richardson; Chris J. Snijders

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of low back pain (LBP) for astronauts in space (68%) is higher than the 1-mo prevalence for the general
population on Earth (39%). It is unclear whether differences occur between healthy subjects and astronauts with a
history of LBP. Knowledge of this issue is important to assess whether a history of LBP could have an operational impact.
METHODS: We evaluated LBP prospectively during short duration spaceﬂight (15 d; N = 20) and compared this with similar data
collected during two bed rest studies (N = 40). Astronauts completed a questionnaire 5—1 0 d preﬂight, during each
ﬂight day, and 5—1 0 d postﬂight.

RESULTS: All astronauts with a history of LBP also developed LBP in ﬂight. These astronauts reported a signiﬁcantly longer
duration of LBP and a different pain location. LBP was most often experienced in the central area of the lower back
during spaceﬂight with an incidence of 70% and a mean pain level of3 (on a scale of 0—1 0). Pain resolved within 10 d of
ﬂight. No neurological signs were present. The most frequently reported countermeasure was assuming a ""knees to
chest (fetal tuck) position”combined with stretching. Greater LBP intensity was reported in spaceﬂight than bed rest
with a trend indicating a greater number of days of pain during spaceﬂight.

DISCUSSION: The current study represents a prospective study of LBP in spaceﬂight. The results indicate that LBP is seIf—Iimiting in
spaceﬂight and should not pose an operational risk. Prior LBP on Earth appears to be a risk factor for LBP in spaceﬂight.
KEYWORDS: Low back pain, microgravity, intervertebral disc.

Pool—Goudzwaard AL, Belavy DL, Hides JA, Richardson CA, Snijders CJ. Low backpa/n in microgravity and bed reststud/es. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015;86(6):54i—547.
stronauts exposed to microgravity frequently report The aim of the current study is to describe prospectively the
low back pain (LBP). According to the literature 52— development and course of LBP in microgravity in full detail
68% of astronauts develop LBP during short-term regarding onset, localization, severity, and relieving countermea-

spaceﬂight.19 This is higher than the l-mo prevalence of LBP sures undertaken by astronauts per day in short-term ﬂight.
typically reported in the general population on Earth (39%).14 We compared the development and course of LBP between astro-
The most detailed work on LBP to date is a retrospective study nauts with a history of LBP prior to ﬂight versus healthy astronauts
0f 19 astronauts reporting in-ﬂight back pain.19 These subjects (110 LBP). We also aimed to compare data from spaceﬂight to data
described the pain as dull (62%), localized to the lower back on LBP published in two bed rest studies.1‘3 Our primary hypoth-
(50%), with a mean intensity of two on a ﬁve-point scale. The esis was that LBP in microgravity is self-limiting.
duration of pain varied from 14 to 100% of the ﬂight. Such pain —

' ' > ' ' ' ' From the MOVE Research Institute, Faculty of Human Movement Sciences,
may J 60p ard1.2e a crewmembers performance 111 OI'blt 8111C? 1t Amsterdam, Department ofNeuroscience, Erasmus MC University, Rotterdam, The
can haVe an ImpaCt 011 mOOd Status) as demonStrated durlng Netherlands; the Centre for Muscle and Bone Research, Charité Universitatsmedizin

- - - 16 - - Berlin, Berlin, Germany; the Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, Mary MacKillop
Slmulatéd m1cr0grav1ty. A pI'IOI' reV1ew _haS argued that low Institute for Health Research, Australian Catholic University, Queensland, Australia;
back paln may hlnder an aStrOnaUt S ablllty t0 perform Chal' Schoolof Physiotherapy, Australian Catholic University, Brisbane, Australia; Mater/ACU
- ' ' _ Back Stability Clinic, Mater Health Services Brisbane Limited, South Brisbane,

lenging tasll<5s by- (lilisrupting sleep and dsubsequently mentalgoli: Queensland, Australia.
centrat10n° Wlt space agenc1es an governments aroun t 6 This manuscript was received for review in October 2014. It was accepted for publication
world moving toward manned missions to Mars, LBP may be a in March 2015.
health CODCGI‘D. However, basic information measured in a 1310— Address correspondence to Dr. Annelies P001—G0udzwaard,MOVE Research Institute

. d . 1 k. h 1 d d 1 Amsterdam, Faculty of Human Movement Sciences, VU University, Amsterdam, The
spective stu yis ac 111g ont e natura course an eve opment Netherlands; annehes.p001@gmaﬂ.com.
Of LBP durlng Spaceﬂlght- Furthermore It IS nOt known hOW a Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association, Alexandria, VA.
history of LBP prior to ﬂight will affect LBP in space. DOI: 10.3357/AMHR4169.2015

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 6 June 2015 541

"
"2","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzwaard etal.
M ETHODS ﬁrst pre-bed rest test results, the results of the ﬁrst 15 d of bed rest,
and the post test results of the 5th day were used for analysis.
Subjects Data from the pain drawing was divided into ﬁve different
Astronauts participating in a spaceﬂight as well as volunteers pain localizations:
p art1c1p at1ng 1n t_WO separate bedrest stud1es enrolled 1n the 1) pain in the surrounding of the iliac crest at the posterior iliac
study For conven1ence, astronauts, cosmonauts, and volunteers . .
, _ _ sp1nes on both s1des;
were 1ncluded 1n the study No sample estlmates were calcu- . .
_ _ _ _ 2) LBP 1n a broad central lower lumbar reglon;
lated. Perm1ss1on for the conduct of the stud1es was glven by the . . . . .
_ _ _ _ _ 3) pa1n 1n a small area at the he1ght of the lllac crest and L5;
Medlcal Ethlcal Commlttee of Erasmus MC Un1vers1ty, Rotter- 4) ain at the level ole-L3- and
dam, ""lhe Netherlands, and the Medical Ethical Committee of 5) p ain in the bu t tocks ’
Charité Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, and the Aerztekammer p °
Nordrhein, Dusseldorf, Germany. All subjects gave their writ- Data from provoking periods was divided into siX different
ten informed consent. categories:
. . 1) unknown;
Questlonnalres 2) bein stra ed for lon time (slee in )-
Using an LBP questionnaire, the development of low back .g p p . g p g ’ .
, , _ _ 3) stat1c posture not us1ng the back for a long t1me;
pa1n 1n astronauts and cosmonauts dur1ng spaceﬂlght was . . .
_ _ _ _ _ _ 4) dur1ng or after walking or runn1ng;
assessed to ga1n 1ns1ght 1n the development, locatlon, sever1ty . .
. . . 5) work p0s1t10n; and
of LBP, neurolog1cal s1gns and poss1ble countermeasures .
. 6) stra1ghtened back.
astronauts and cosmonauts develop for themselves. Locallza-
tion was tested with a pain drawing and a pain Numeric Rat- Data on helpful countermeasures was divided into 7 differ-
ing Scale (NRS) from 0 (no pain) to 10 (excruciating pain) ent countermeasures:
was added to measure the intensity of pain.12 Both drawing
. . 1) unknown;
and NRS have been demonstrated to be valld and rellable . .
measurements “’13 Two 0 en uestions were added to ask for 2) dally regular exerc1se;
_ _° _ p _ q 3) fetal tuck (full ﬂeXion knees to Chest);
provoklng perlods dur1ng ﬂ1ght and to ask about what coun- .
, 4) mov1ng around;
termeasures the astronaut undertook. Two yes/no questlons .
were added to ask for an neurolo ical si ns like ins and 5)stretch1ng;
_ _ _ _ Y g g p , 6) full ﬂexion combined with full ﬂeXion (fetal tuck); and
needles or pa1n rad1at1ng 1nto the leg, and one yes/ no questlon . . .
. . . . 7) paln medlcation.
asked for the cont1nu1ty of pa1n (present whole ﬂ1ght day). A
ﬁnal yes/no question was added to ask for the use of any pain
medication. Statistical Analysis
The occurrence, localization, intensity, continuity, and dura-
Procedure tion of LBP has been described for all subjects and tested for
""lhe questionnaire was completed by astronauts 10 d (i 5) signiﬁcant difference between astronauts experiencing LBP
prior to the ﬂight, each day during the 12- to 15-d ﬂight, as with no history of LBP on Earth and those who experienced
well as 10 d (i 5) postﬂight. At 3 to 6 mo postﬂight, a debrief— LBP in their life prior to ﬂight using Wilcoxon ranking for the
ing was scheduled to determine the effectiveness of the coun- dichotomous variable and ordinal variable and the Student
termeasures for the astronauts who experienced LBP. Two t-test for the continuous variable (NRS, duration). Descriptive
questions were added postﬂight during the debrieﬁng: “Did data on provoking movements or periods and successful
you experience any LBP during your life prior to the ﬂight?” countermeasures undertaken by astronauts will be described.
and “Did you do any training in the International Space Cen- Data on LBP in ﬂight was compared with data on LBP col-
tre ISS?” lected in previous bed rest studiesl‘3 on pain VAS and pain
To compare data of LBP in microgravity with LBP experi- drawing. To be able to compare the data on the pain NRS and
enced in simulated microgravity, the LBP-questionnaire was also pain VAS, scores on both lists were expressed as percentages
part of questionnaires used in two bed rest studies,1‘3 although in of maximum score. Unless otherwise stated, values are reported
both studies a pain Visual Analog Scale (VAS) was used instead as mean (SD). An alpha level of 0.05 was taken for statistical
of a pain NRS. Both instruments test sufﬁcient for reliability, test- signiﬁcance. ""lhe PASW 17.0 software was used for statistical
retest.6 Further, both instruments demonstrate high construct analyses.
validity ranging from 0.71—0.78.6 Before, during, and after each
bed rest study the questionnaires were ﬁlled in, although pre- and
post-bed rest measurements differed in number and days com- RESULTS
pared to the in-ﬂight study Also, the duration of microgravity
(12—15 (1) was different from the duration of the bed rest studies: Data were recorded for 20 astronauts during 10 different ﬂights
in one case 60 d (in Berlin, Germanyl’z) and in the other 21 d (in (5 Soyuz missions from 2004-2007 and 5 Space Shuttle mis-
Cologne, Germany3). To be able to compare all studies only the sions from 2007-2010). ""lhe duration of ﬂights ranged from 11
542 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 6 June 2015

"
"3","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzvvaard etal.
to 15 d. In ﬁve astronauts, data of the last 4 ﬂight days were medication, three reported using painkillers due to head-
missing. One astronaut reported this was due to stowing the aches. Of the four astronauts using pain medication for LBP,
paper questionnaire in the Soyuz while staying in the ISS. Dur- two (15%) reported pain relief due to these drugs. No neuro-
ing the debrieﬁng postﬂight all of these four astronauts stated logical signs were reported.
they did not experience LBP in the last ﬂight days. All astro- Two astronauts reported LBP postﬂight (5—10 (1) in the
nauts reported haVing used the treadmill in the 188 for training ﬁrst 4 d after ﬂight with a mean intensity of two on the NRS.
activities. Socio-demographic data of all astronauts and cosmo- One astronaut stated that the pain was relieved during daily
nauts are shown in Table 1. activities and running, while the other reported experiencing

None of the astronauts reported any LBP 5—10 (1 prior to a relief with massage. Both had a history of LBP prior to the
ﬂight. Data on development, intensity, and continuity of LBP, ﬂight.
and the presence of any neurological signs per ﬂight day are Of the eight astronauts who already experienced an epi-
shown in Fig. 1. In all astronauts LBP was self-limiting. No LBP sode of LBP on Earth, all experienced LBP during ﬂight (prev-
occurred after ﬂight day 9. alence 100%). Of the 12 astronauts without a history of LBP
Overall, 14 astronauts (70%) experienced LBP with a prior to ﬂight, 4 did experience LBP in ﬂight. A signiﬁcant
mean of 5 d of pain (i 2 (1). Of the 14 astronauts experienc- difference was present between astronauts with a history of
ing LBP, 8 had a history of LBP on Earth prior to the ﬂight. back pain compared to those without concerning the number
None of the astronauts without pain in ﬂight had a history of of days experiencing LBP (P < 0.01). A mean of 5 d of experi-
LBP on Earth. Mean intensity of pain on the pain NRS was 3 encing LBP was reported in the “history of LBP group” com-
(i 1). ""lhe highest score on a pain NRS was 7 out of 10 on pared to 2 d in “the ﬁrst time LBP group.” Another signiﬁcant
ﬂight day 1 in one astronaut with a history of LBP on Earth. difference between both groups was demonstrated in the pain
""lhis astronaut reported that the severe LBP was interfering location (P < 0.05). In 50% of the astronauts experiencing
with his mental concentration. ""lhere were 29% of the astro- LBP for the ﬁrst time, pain was described in the upper regions
nauts who reported pain in the surrounding iliac crest at the of the lumbar spine, a small area covering L1-L3. In the “his-
posterior iliac spines on both sides, 38% reported LBP in a tory of LBP group,” 46% experienced pain in the lower back in
broad central lower lumbar region, 20% reported pain in a the area surrounding the iliac crest at the posterior iliac spines
small area at the height of the iliac crest and L5, 9% reported on both sides, and 30% in a broader area of the lower lumbar
pain at the level of L1-L3, and 4% reported pain at the but- spine. No signiﬁcant difference was reported in pain onset,
tocks. ""lhe main provoking activities associated with LBP intensity, pain provocation, or in relieVing countermeasures
were unknown in 38%. In 45% pain was reported after sleeping undertaken by astronauts.
and in 7% pain provocation was associated with maintaining A total of 33 subjects participated in two bed rest studies
a static posture. ""lhe most relieVing countermeasures were resulting in 40 datasets (Table I). ""lhere were 24 subjects who
fetal tuck (rolling up to full ﬂeXion) combined with full participated in the second Berlin bed rest study. Seven sub-
extension in 30%, fetal tuck (knees to chest) alone in 19%, jects participated in the Cologne bed rest study consisting of
moving around in 15%, painkillers in 15%, and stretching in two consecutive campaigns (cross over design) leading to 14
5%. During debrieﬁng all astronauts pointed out that they datasets, plus 1 dataset from a subject in the ﬁrst campaign
had used the treadmill during their stay in the ISS. ""lhe rea- (dropped out on day 30 after bed rest) and 1 subject in the
son for running on the treadmill was given as the urge to be second campaign. From the 33 subjects a total of 15 subjects
active and not as a direct countermeasure for LBP. Some reported one or more episodes of LBP prior to the bed rest
astronauts reported that running exercises might have helped study (one from a spinal fracture). Of these 15 subjects, 4
to prevent LBP. also reported LBP on the pretest with a mean pain of 17 mm
Data on the use and effect of pain medications are missing on the pain VAS and one of the subjects with no history of
in three astronauts since paper copies of the questionnaire LBP reported pain on the pretest (22 mm on pain VAS).
were made without the last question. One of these three astro- During the first 15 d of all bed rest study campaigns a total
nauts experienced LBP. A total of nine astronauts used pain of 22 subjects (67%) reported LBP with a mean duration of
medications, although two reported the use of these drugs as 4.5 (1 (min 1 (1, max 15 d) and a mean score of 22 mm on the
part of the EVA protocol while they did not experience any pain VAS (i 12.6 mm SD) with most subjects experiencing
pain at all. Of the remaining seven astronauts using pain pain on day 2. Out of 12 subjects known to have LBP prior to
the study, 6 did not experience any LBP during the study.
Table l. Participants and low back pain (LBP) Characteristics. The mean pain intensity for the other 6 subjects was signiﬁ-
— cantly higher with respect to the 16 subjects experiencing
BED . .

ASTRONAUTS REST SUBJECTS LBP for the ﬁrst tlme dur1ng the bed rest study (26 mm i
m 12.8 vs. 18.6 rnm i 11.6 SD). Also, the number of days in
Gender, MaIe/Female (N) 17/5 100/0 pa1n was s1gn1ﬁcantly higher (P < 0.05) in subjects with his-
LBP occurrence, N (percentage oftotal) 12 (60%) 22 (67%) tory of LBP than in those subjects with no history of LBP
HiStOW 01‘ LBP, N (perCentage Oftotal) 8 (40%) 15 (45%) (5 d i 4 vs. 2 d i 2). One subject experienced constant pain
w every day. All subjects reported LBP in the central region of

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 6 June 2015 543

"
"4","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzwaard etal.
Number of astronauts with low back pain intensity of LBP was experi-
enced in space (mean score 30
20 : 12.7% vs. 21 : 12.3%), a
trend could be seen on a longer
16 duration OfLBP in space (4 d i
12 2 vs. 3 d i 2 in bed-rest
8 subjects).
0 I ' - 1
Pre 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Post DISCUSSION
Flight'day 1he most important new ﬁnd-
1ng of-the current study 1s that
there 1s a 100% prevalence of
LBP during spaceﬂight in as-
P ain intensity tronauts with a history of LBP
prior to ﬂight. Since all of these
10 astronauts reported “non-speciﬁc”
LBP, we were not able to relate
9 the ﬁndings to what pathology
8 i may have been present. A num-
7 ber of factors, such as disc and
6 y facet joint pathology, different
5 - muscle motor patterns of the
4 ----- - muscles 0fthe trunk, and altera-
3 . ""l tions in nociceptive system pro-
2 l cessing,5’7’10 may be associated
1 -. with these effects in spaceﬂight.
0 I i i I 111e underlying mechanism of
Pre 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1o 11 12 13 14 15 Post Pain occurrence is m0“ likely
. the sudden lengthening of the
Fl'ght day spine, studied well in bed rest,8
End thought to occur in space-
1ght along Wlth overall 1ncreases
Fig. 1. The incidence (upper) and intensity (lower) of low back pain in 20 astronauts in 15—d spaceﬂight. Upper: data in body height.18’20 On the basis
have been separated into number of astronauts experiencing pain constantly throughout the ﬂight day or only inter— Of our ﬁndings, prior incidence
mittently. Lower: both median and mean values from all astronauts reporting pain are reported. Error bars indicate SD. of low back pain Should be con-
No astronauts reported any symptoms Indicating neurological Involvement. _ _
s1dered a r1sl< factor for low back
pain occurrence in spaceﬂight,
the lumbar spine. One of the subjects could not report any and even more so since the highest pain level as reported was
provoking moments 0r relieVing countermeasures. Other interfering with mental concentration.
subjects reported more frequent turning as a successful coun- In line with earlier studies, LBP is a self-limiting problem
termeasure. N0 neurological signs were present in the sub- in spaceﬂight.9 N0 astronaut reported any LBP after 9 d of
jects. In a total of 8 subjects, LBP was present in the post bed rest ﬂight. We hypothesize that this is because of full adaptation of
phase with a mean of 29.2 mm on the pain VAS (i 13.1 mm). the lumbar spine and ligamentous tissues to functioning in a
Of these 8, 5 also experienced LBP during the bed rest and microgravity environment. Of all astronauts in the current
had a history of LBP while 3 did not experience any LBP prior study, 70% reported LBP, which is in line with data from an ear-
to or during the bed rest study. lier retrospective analysis,19 although Kerstman et al.9 reported
Comparing data on LBP in space with bed rest demon- a prevalence of 52%. 1he difference in prevalence rates might
strated a difference between the two groups since no pain was be due to the high number of astronauts with a history of low
present in astronauts 0n the preﬂight test while ﬁve bed rest back pain in our study. 1he number of astronauts with a his-
subjects already reported LBP at the pretest. 111ese ﬁve sub- tory of LBP prior to ﬂight is not reported by Kerstman et al.9
jects were excluded from subsequent comparisons between Furthermore, in their retrospective analysis, only Space Shuttle
spaceﬂight and bed rest to avoid a confounding effect by the astronauts consistently completed a low back pain question-
presence of LBP. For those days in pain, a signiﬁcantly greater naire, whereas for the remaining programs, a Chart audit was
544 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 6 June 2015

"
"5","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzvvaard etal.
performed. 111is could have resulted in some under-reporting and restore normal function in a microgravity environment.
of back pain. Most astronauts report that it is hard to perform a full stretch in

It was demonstrated that in all astronauts experiencing LBP, space since they are not able to anchor their feet. Maybe an
the pain started from day 1 as soon as exposure to microgravity adaptation could be made to the 188 to make this full stretch to
commenced. Highest pain intensity was scored on day 1 as well, extension easier to perform. Since, for astronauts, LBP is pro-
median 4 on NRS. ""lhe highest score (7) on the NRS was also on yoked most often by sleep, studying ways to decrease pain dur-
day 1. ""lhis was not different between the two LBP groups (with ing sleep is recommended, because disruption of sleep interferes
and without history of LBP) nor was pain intensity. As men- with concentration, decreases energy levels, affects mood, and
tioned this astronaut reported that this severe LBP was interfer- may interfere with routine tasks.
ing with his mental concentration. However, this is reported in As mentioned, all astronauts noted that they used the tread-
only one astronaut, therefore we cannot speculate on safety mill during their stay on the 188 for being active and not as a
measures. Differences between the two groups occurred in pain direct countermeasure for LBP. Some astronauts reported that
localization. A broader area of pain in the lower back was expe- running exercises might have helped to prevent LBP. Indeed, the
rienced in the “history group” while a smaller area higher up in study of Kerstmann et al. demonstrated a relief of pain in 85% of
the lumbar spine (L1-L3) was mostly reported in the “ﬁrst LBP the astronauts who exercised.9 We can only speculate on how this
group.” We expect that tissues already affected will be more activity is related to the occurrence of LBP during ﬂight and how
vulnerable to all changes which occur during adaptation as this is related to LBP during a long stay in microgravity. We rec-
described above. For the “ﬁrst LBP group,” LBP was experi- ommend this topic for future research. Since most astronauts
enced in the region where most ﬂeXion occurs in the lumbar report that pain is at its highestlevel after sleeping, a device could
spine (L1-L3), taking into account the prolonged stooped posi- be developed to introduce a stimulus for astronauts to alter posi-
tion of the spine in microgravity We speculate that elongation tion of the spine during sleeping. Data from the bed rest studies
of the spine combined with the more ﬂexed position at L1-L3 suggest that short duration loading of the spine is not very effec-
increased tension in the dorsal ligamentous structures and tive in preventing morphological Changes in the discs (for discus-
annulus ﬁbrosus, stimulating the sinuvertebral nerves of the sion see BelaVy et al.4). We did not test morphological Changes to
discs and ligaments of the spine. Another signiﬁcant difference discs and other structures in the astronauts pre- and postﬂight
between two groups was the duration of LBP. We hypothesize due to funding issues. rlherefore, we are not able to compare
that in those with a history of LBP the affected tissues have been morphological changes to discs during bed rest vs. the micro-
less able to adapt to microgravity Conversely, only those with- gravity environment. However, we hypothesize that more con-
out any prior low back pain have a Chance of experiencing tinuous loading of the discs is important. A suit or vest that
microgravity without any pain (30%). provides physiological loading of the spine and musculature

We expected an inﬂuence of EVA on LBP in space. 111is was, during daily activities in microgravity could be developed. How-
however, not reported in the two astronauts who carried out ever, Russian cosmonaut experiences suggest that the com-
EVA. We cannot draw any conclusions since both used painkill- fort of such a device may be limited.9 Hence, implementation
ers according to protocol and due to the small sample size. In of wearing a suit or vest could be considered speciﬁcally for
our study, differences in occurrence of LBP related to gender astronauts with either known LBP that interferes with mission
could not be tested for signiﬁcant difference due to the small performance or those at risk. Also, pain medication as pre-
sample size. However, reported pain levels and intensity are caution during the ﬁrst ﬂight days could be beneﬁcial.
very similar in men and women. ""lhe current study demonstrated that the occurrence of low

In our current study, most pain and provocation was back pain on Earth during bed rest is different from LBP in
reported after sleeping. During sleeping most astronauts are microgravity concerning pain intensity, and a trend has been
strapped to the wall (to avoid drifting around) or sleep in spe- demonstrated regarding duration. During bed rest, subjects still
Cially designed cabinets. Some astronauts try to sleep with their use their trunk musculature to move in bed. Hence, we hypoth-
knees strapped in ﬂeXion. None of the astronauts was able to esize that the higher pain intensity in space could be related to
turn or, as we speculate, did they feel the urge to turn over dur- more profound adaptations of the spine in spaceﬂight. It is also
ing sleeping. ""lhis will result in a long period > 8 h of move- Clear that a perfect 1:1 comparison between microgravity and
ment deprivation. It is likely that the intervertebral discs will simulated microgravity is not possible regarding the described
increase in height and ligaments will be fully stretched by elon- countermeasures to diminish LBP. ""lhe most important coun-
gation of the spine.17’18’20 ""lhis may be why most astronauts termeasure for bed rest LBP subjects was turning over while
report that stretching to full extension combined with a fetal lying.111is activity is impossible for astronauts in ﬂight. None of
tuck is most effective as a countermeasure.9’19 However, fetal the subjects in bed rest studies reported making movements in
tuck on its own has been reported to be a less favorable counter- the spine from full ﬂeXion to full extension as being effective,
measure than fetal tuck combined with stretching to full exten- while this is the most effective countermeasure in space. It
sion. We regard the need for a combination of full extension seems that LBP on Earth, even during bed rest, cannot be com-
with full ﬂeXion as a sign that movement in the full range of pared to a microgravity enVironment.
motion is necessary as a stimulus for all tissues (discs, capsules, ""lhe most important limitation of the current study is the
ligamentous tissues, nerves, and muscles) to normalize tension limited number of subjects. While the sample size is quite

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, No. 6 June 2015 545

"
"6","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzwaard etal.
large in comparison to typical spaceﬂight and bed rest studies, Australia; Julie A. Hides, Ph.D., M.Phty.St., Mater/ACU Back Stability Clinic,
caution should Still be used when applying the ﬁndings to Mater Health,SerVices Brisbane Limited, South Brisbane, and Director, Centre for
. . . . Musculoskeletal Research, Mary MacKillop Institute for Health Research,
w1der populatlons. Nonetheless, the maln ﬁndlngs are largely A . . . . . _
_ _ 9 19 _ _ _ ustrahan Cathohc Un1vers1ty, Banyo, Queensland, Austraha, Prof. Carolyn A.
In agreement Wlth Other reports. ) AnOther 1mp Ottant 11ml"" Richardson, Ph.D., M.Phty.St., School of Physiotherapy, Australian Catholic
tatiOh 18 the faCt that in 0116 Of the bed I'eSt StUdiGS, Speciﬁc University, Brisbane, Australia; Prof. Chris J. Snjiders, Ph.D., Department of
exercise protocols were performed, Although astronauts Neuroscience, ErasmusMC University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
also perform countermeasure exercises, their protocols were
undoubtedly different from those performed in the bed rest
study. We were not able to obtain data on the performance of REFERENCES
countermeasure exercise during spaceﬂight, hence, any con-
founding effect of exercise is unclear. Another limitation is the 1° Belem"" DL’ ArmbreCht G; GaSt U) RiChf‘rdson CA’_t_ﬁd‘?S Vt) Felsenberg
age difference between the astronauts and be (1 rest S tu (1)7 sub- 11)). Counterrneasures agalnst lumbar splne decond1t10n1ng 1n Prolonged
_ _ _ ed-rest: res1st1ve exerc1se w1th and w1th0ut whole-body V1bratlon. J Appl
JGCtS. One would expect some degeneratlon of lumbar sp1ne Physiol. 2010; 109(6):1801_1811.
function with age, however, astronauts are well trained and 2, Belavy DL, Armbrecht G, Richardson CA, Felsenberg D, Hides IA.
in good physical condition, despite their age, The difference Muscle atrophy and changes in spinal morphology: is the lumbar spine
between the two subject populations needs to be considered Wlnefable after Pmlonged bed'reSt? SP1“? 20113 36(2)‘137‘145-
when interpreting differences between spaceﬂight and bed 3' Belavy D_L’ Bansmann PMi BOhme G’ angS'Meuthen P’ Heer M’ et aL
_ _ _ _ Changes 1n 1ntervertebrald1sc morphology pers1st 5 months after 21-days
rest 1n LBP. Furthermore, selectlon b1as mlght be present, b e d-rest. J Appl Physiol. 2011; 111(5):130 4_131 4.
although we regard the selection bias as minimal. All astronauts 4. Belavy DL, Ohshima H, Bareﬂle M-P, Rittweger L Felsenberg D. Limited
are selected prior to the study for their expertise and knOWl- effect of ﬂy-wheel and spinal mobilization exercise countermeasures on
edge. They are extensively trained regarding protocols and lumbar spine deconditioning during 90d bed-rest in the Toulouse LTBR
physical ﬁtness. After selection for a spaceﬂight program they Study Ada AStmnaut' 2011; 69(7'8)‘406_419°
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ 5. Cheung KM, Karppinen J, Chan D, Ho DVV, Song YQ, et al. Prevalence
are 1ntroduced to the stud1es 1n wh1ch they w111 part1c1pate. and H b . . . h . 1 _
pattern 0 um ar magnetlc resonance lmaglng c anges 1n a popu a
There is no self'seleCtton for the Studies Performed during the tion study of one thousand forty-three individuals. Spine. 2009; 34(9):
spaceﬂight. However, selection bias in the bed rest subjects 934—940.
might be present) since they volunteered for the studyo Finally) 6. Hawker GA, Mian S, Kendzerska T, FI'Bl’lCh M. Measures Of adult
different pain measures were used in space vs. bed rest. The If)”; YIS?;1R§HSI9% 8:212? PPaianVAsfPain); NEE‘SS‘): iiinfscale
. . or am am , c 1 am ues ionnaire , or - orm
ChOlC€ of comparable bed rest stud1es was made after the ﬁrst McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), Chronic Pain Grade Scale
pain measurement was carried out in space. Since the con- (CPGS), Short Form-36 Bodily Pain Scale (SF-36 BPS), and Measure of
struct validity Of both pain-measuring instruments iS sufﬁ- Intermittent and Constant Osteoarthritis Pain (ICOAP). Arthritis Care
ciently high and compatible, it was decided not to alter the R68 (Hoboken)- 2011; 63(SUPP1 11)23240-3252.
pain measurement tOOl already implemented in the space 7. H1des 14, Richardson CA, Iull GA. Multlﬁdus muscle recovery 1s not
S tu dy. automatlc after resolutlon of acute, ﬁrst-ep1sode low back pa1n. Splne.
_ _ _ 1996; 21(23):2763—2769.

In conclus1on, the mam ﬁnd1ng Ofthe current Study was that 8. Hutchinson K], Watenpaugh DE, Murthy G, Convertino VA, Hargens
LBP in spaceﬂight is a self-limiting condition. Another impor- AR. Back pain during 6 degrees head-down tilt approximates that during
tant ﬁnding was that prior history of LBP on Earth is a risk fac- actual microgravity. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1995; 66(3):256—259.
tor for LBP occurrence during spaceﬂight. 9. Kerstman EL, Scheuring RA, Barnes MG, DeKorse TB, Saile LG. Space

adaptation back pain: a retrospective study. Aviat Space Environ Med.
2012; 83(1):2—7.
10. Manchukonda R, Manchikanti KN, Cash KA, Pampati V, Manchikanti
L. Facet joint pain in chronic spinal pain: an evaluation of prevalence
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and false-positive rate of diagnostic blocks. J Spinal Disord Tech. 2007;
20(7):539—545.
We would like to thank all astronauts who have participated in the study. This 11. Mannion AF, Balague F, Pellise F, Cedraschi C. Pain measurement in
work was supported by Grant 2003-DSM-MUS-100 from the European Space patients with low back pain. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2007; 3(11):
Agency. The bed rest studies were supported by the European Space Agency 610-618.
and the German Aerospace Center (DLR). The 2nd Berlin Bed Rest Study was 12. Melzack R. The MCGiH Pain Questionnaire: major properties and SCOY—
also supported by Novotec Medical, Charité Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Sie- ing methods. Pain. 1975; 1(3)2277-299.
mens, Osteomedical Group, Wyeth Pharma, Servier Deutschland, P&G, 13. Ostelo RVV, de Vet HC. Clinically important outcomes in low back pain.
Kubivent, Seca, Astra-Zeneka and General Electric. Daniel L. Belavy was sup- Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2005; 19(4):593—607.
ported by a post-doctoral fellowship from the Alexander von Humboldt 14. Papageorgiou AC, Croft PR, Ferry S, Jayson MI, Silman A]. Estimating
Foundation. The low back pain in bed rest project was also supported by grant the prevalence of low back pain in the general population. Evidence from
number FE 468/ 5-1 from the German Research Foundation (DFG). the South Manchester Back Pain Survey. Spine. 1995; 20(17):1889—1894.

Authors and aﬁiliations: Annelies L. Pool-Goudzwaard, Ph.D., M.Phty., 15. Sayson IV, Hargens AR. Pathophysiology of low back pain during
M.Psych., Department of Neuroscience, ErasmusMC University, Rotterdam, The exposure to microgravity Aviat Space Environ Med. 2008; 79(4):365—373.
Netherlands, and MOVE Research Institute Amsterdam, Faculty of Human 16. Styf]R,Hutchinson K, Carlsson SG,Hargens AR. Depression,mood state,
Movement Sciences, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Daniel L. and back pain during microgravity simulated by bed rest. Psychosom
Belavy, Ph.D., Centre for Muscle and Bone Research, Charité Universitatsmedizin Med. 2001; 63(6):862—864.

Berlin, Berlin, Germany, and Centre for Physical Activity and Nutrition Research, 17. Thornton WE, Hoffer GVV, Rummel IA. Antropometric changes and ﬂuid
School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria, shifts. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, eds. Biomedical results from Skylab.
546 AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, NO. 6 JUNE 2015

"
"7","LOW BACK PAIN IN SPACE—Pool—Goudzvvaard etal.
Washington, DC: NASA; 1977:330—338; NASA SP-377. [Accessed 5 Oct 19. Wing PC, Tsang IKY, Susak L, Gagnon F, Gagnon R, Potts IE. Back
2014.] Available in the “Reading Room” in the NASA Life Sciences Data pain and spinal changes in microgravity. Orthop Clin North Am. 1991;
Archive: http://lsda.jsc.nasa.g0V/. 22(2):255—262.

18. Thornton WE, Moore TR. Height changes in microgravity. In: Bungo 20. Young KS, Rajulu S. The effects of microgravity 0n seated height
MW, Bagian TM, Bowman MA, Levitan BM, editors. Results of the life (spinal elongation). 2011. NASA Report Number ISC-CN-25133. [Ac-
sciences DSOs conducted abroad the space shuttle 1981-1986. Houston cessed 5 Oct 2014.] Available from http://ntrs.nasa.g0V/search.jsp?R=
(TX): NASA—Iohnson Space Center; 1987: 55—77. 20110023150.

AEROSPACE MEDICINE AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE Vol. 86, NO. 6 June 2015 547

"
