"","x"
"1","42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2004-121
5 - 8 January 2004, Reno, Nevada
’ AIAA-2004-O121
THE CANADIAN SPACE AGENCY ‘
: MICROGRAVITY SCIENCES
PROGRAM OVERVIEW 3
CatherineCasgrain, Marcus Dejmek, Stefanie Ruel,
Eric Vachon _ _
:4; Canadian Space Agency '
g: Life and Physical Sciences
E» 6767 route de I’Aeroport
g Saint-Hubert, Quebec, Canada
g J3Y 8Y9 ' _ _
42""“I Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit
» ' 5-8 January 2004
Reno, Nevada  

"
"2","AIAA 2004-0121
THE CANADIAN SPACE AGENCY MICROGRAVITY SCIENCES PROGRAM OVERVIEW1
Catherine Casgrain , Marcus Dejmek, Stefanie Ruel, Eric Vachon
Life and Physical Sciences
Canadian Space Agency, Saint—Hubert, Quebec, Canada
ABSTRACT .
INTRODUCTION ‘
Canadian scientists have been conducting physical I
science experiments in microgravity for 20 years. Canada’s major contribution to the International
However, with the delay in the ISS assembly and the Space Station (188) consists of the Mobile Servicing
Columbia accident, access to long duration System (M88). The M88 is a sophisticated space-
microgravity has become very limited for the next based robotic system, which is used to assemble and
few years. New avenues need to be explored. In maintain the Space Station, and to transport and
2002, through international collaborations, the maintain payloads in orbit. The Canadarm2 as well as
g Canadian Space Agency supported two missions on the Mobile Base, two parts of the 3-part system, are
at recoverable satellites. While waiting for 188 already operational on the station.
é availability, access to this type of platform will be
3» further investigated Meanwhile, we are Pursuing the ﬁﬁgwﬁwte‘y
E development of our Payloads for 133 as well as our ﬁtwwwt‘t
g purposeexperimentalpayloadsforISSisexpectedto @“mw
:3 experimental results. In addition, telescience control :nggsiggmfgm
g of experiments at CSA’s PTOC (Payload Telescience §¥§gﬁ§§§giéﬁetwgfﬁj
g and Operations Centre), which is dedicated to the “ﬁgmﬂﬁgﬁéw”s&g&
3“ Life and Physical Sciences, will give scientists the ttﬁi
0 SJ» Egg; “3, ’-
Egg ’ CSA’s strategy for facility development includes the ’ ~
é use of the Microgravitywibration Isolation Mount ‘ 51;“
(L3 . (MIM) with visiting experimental payloads. ”2""”
(3;. Experimental measurements taken on Mll‘ anti the “K,
% Space Shuttle under conditions of variable MES:
% microgravity (vibration isolation, non-isolation and t :893“;
g forced—g modes) showed a clear difference between i t T ?%x‘
(<5 the experimental measurements taken during both
E: non-isolated 'and isolated g-levels. A dedicate‘d'MIM Figure 1: Thile r1! iing System (MSS)
g Base Unit Will be one of Canada’s ﬁrst facdities on
E 188’ elong with a mid-dech-locker—sue payload for Helping to build and maintain the 188 is the most
E ?réigﬁie d 3,3233; Eigféﬁfgf) called ATEN tengible role for the. MISS, but it has another .less
. ' Visible but equally Signiﬁcant role: it has prowded
. . . . . Canadian scientists with access to the Space Station
In order to max1mize the selentific returns on 188’ the laboratory facilities to conduct scientific experiments.
18.8 p artner agetieles are WOW? together F0. p rowde Indeed, the contribution of the robotic system to the
ﬂlght . opportunities aild experimental facﬂities for 188 gives Canadian scientists the right to use 2.3% of
SCIentIStS. Two Canadian seientists selected from the the non—Russi an p ortion 0f the International Space
ﬁrSt International Announcement Of.Opp.0rtun1ty Station for research over the ﬁfteen years of its
have commenced research pI'OJCCtS 1n ﬂuld selences. ex p e etc (1 life. For the Physical Sciences Program
(PSP) (formerly the Microgravity Science Program
(MSP)) and its scientiﬁc community, this represents
the continuous use of one double mid-deck locker.
] Copyright © 2004 by the American Institute of Aeronautics .
and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.
1
‘ American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","CSA is actively seeking collaboration with other ’
Even though signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts .have agencies to this effect.
already been accrued to the countries that participated ‘
in the development of the technologies required to In 2002, through internatibnal collaborations, the
build the station, scientific return for the beneﬁt of Canadian Space Agency supported two missions 0n
humanity is expected. However, with the delay in the recoverable satellites. In waiting for the ISS, those
188 assembly and the Columbia accident, new platforms will be further investigated.
avenues need to be explored.
In March 2002,. a Chinese recoverable satellite,
SCIENTIFIC PROGRAM “Celestial Boat III”, was launched where experiments
were conducted in a payload dedicated to protein
Canada’s microgravity science activities were crystal growth. Lasting seven days, this mission
initiated in 1983 when Canada ﬂew its first permitted the growth of a total of 16 Chinese and
experiment in a Get Away Special. In 1986, the Canadian proteins in a microgravity environment. ’
E. Space Station User Development Program (UDP)
‘gr was created to generate a Canadian base of An agreement between the CSA and the Chinese
g microgravity users for the future 188 in the areas of Academy of Sciences allowed for the CSA access to
3: materials science and biotechnology. In establishing a this ﬂight opportunity. According .to. this agreement, ‘
E capability for use of the ISS, UDP facilitated access China provided the ﬂight opportunity and the
S to pre—station ﬂight opportunities and supported payload, while the former MSP was responsible to
a) research and development to advance Canada’s provide speciﬁc proteins. The MSP also took on the
E position in the international microgravity community. ' responsibility for the collection of experimental
g ~ results using a high powered X-Ray source
if In 1995, the Microgravity Science Program took over (Synchroton) in addition to perform the analysis of
g that responsibility. CSA’s long term space plan has all the crystals obtained. .
E an allocated budget, which allows it to issue national
3, announcements of opportunities every two years to Post-ﬂight analysis showed a clear improvement of
2 support up to 50 microgravity science projects for the structural resolution of crystals grown in space.
(2: two to four years in three main areas: Material Considering that many agencies have reprioritized
5; science, Fluid and Combustion Sciences and their protein crystal growth programs because of the
E Biotechnology. ~ lack of results, the results mentioned above are
C? interesting and suggest that further analysis should be
8 We are now entering the era of consolidation, the devoted to that question. Among the Canadian
E; formerly known group of Microgravity Science has partners included in this research are Dr. Lin from
% now joined the Life Science group. The new title of Laval University and .Dr. Delbaere from the
a the group is Life and Physical Sciences. The budget University of Saskatchewan.
Q for physical science remains the same however more
(:5: should be achieved under this new umbrella. In October 2002, the CSA participated in an ESA
a Successful practices and experiences from each FOTON mission. Unfortunately, about 30 seconds
g program are anticipated to contribute to a stronger after the launch of the Russian Soyuz rocket, the
g and more cohesive science group. break-up of one of the thrusters caused the fall of the
E rocket, which exploded when entering in contact with
8 Our goal remains to support large projects of the ground. The SCCO (Soret Coefficient in Crude
multidisciplinary teams on a continuous basis and to Oil) experiments as well as all the other experiments
support efforts from Canada’s scientiﬁc community contained in the Foton satellite were lost. A reﬂight
’ to form Topical Teams with the objective to foster of the mission is planned for April 2005 and April
scientiﬁc exchanges on key areas of microgravity 2006, in which CSA is pursuing its collaboration.
research. For example, we have been supporting for This experiment is a collaborative research project
the past 2 years a topical team on G-jitter, with a between C—Core of St-John's, Newfoundland,
mandate to examine the impact of G-jitter on Ryerson Polytechnic University of Toronto and the
scientiﬁc experiments in microgravity. Microgravity Research Center (MRC) of l'Université
libre de Bruxelles. With worldwide oil reserves
With the present delays in station assembly, the use depleting, oil companies are actively seeking ways to
of other microgravity platforms may be the only way improve efﬁciency in recovering oil from oil
to maintain microgravity research programs and the deposits. The SCCO experiment sought to improve
' the conditiOns of oil extraction by studying the
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","phenomenon of diffusion in poroUs media in space. Our Parabolic ﬂight program using the NRC Falcon
Better prediction models will help determine the aircraft is key to providing our scientists an
limits of deep oil reservoirs and allow for more opportunity to gather experimental data in
precise and cost efﬁcient drilling. microgravity, at low cost, for preliminary
investigations in preparing for a long duration
’ Another loss for the Physical Science research mission. There are about three to four campaigns per
program is the loss of the STS-107 scientiﬁc mission, year where there are 20-24 parabolas per campaign
in which the CSA had a PCG experiment in ~ and two to three scientists per campaign. Last year
collaboration with the former Japanese Space Agency we had several experiments: Wetting of a Liquid
NASDA using SpaceHab’s High Density Protein Surface by Another Immiscible Liquid (INRS), High
Crystal Growth facility (HDPCG) equipment. Temperature Synthesis (SHS) of Metal 'Sulﬁdes in
Canadian scientists had access to 144 wells while the Microgravity (McGill University),
Japanese scientists had access to the same number. Electroluminescent Materials Fabrication in Low
Experimental processes and results would have been Gravity Conditions (University of Moncton), G-Jitter .
§ , shared between the two organizations. Signiﬁcant Experiments on Particle and Bubble Motion and
§ effort was devoted to answering the question: ""Is Two—phase ﬂow and Heat Transfer Characteristics of
g microgravity necessary to improve protein crystal an Oscillating Pipe Under Reduced Gravity
g» quality?"". A ground program with experiments (University of Toronto) and Interface Effects in
2' running at the same time and under the same Multiphase Fluid Systems (University of Alberta). '
c2 conditions, was performed in order to assess the .
g pertinence of microgravity for improving protein Last fall, two science reviews took place at CSA. One
g crystal growth. Despite the tremendous loss for the was on Material science and the other one was on
'§ human space ﬂight program, important insights were Fluid and Combustion sciences. Those reviews are
TE? gained on mission operations that will be used for performed once a year to look at the progress of the
E future missions and will contribute to improving our scientiﬁc projects funded by CSA. The reviews
g mission success rate. represent a great occasion for the scientists to
:“ exchange with their colleagues on their research. The
E9 As previously described, our ﬂight opportunities are interactions were particularly constructive and
E a tribute to the international collaboration between productive.
£2 _ Canadian scientists and their colleagues from the
E international community. This is one of the reasons
8 why the PSP was a supporter of the ﬁrst International EXPERIMENTAL PAYLOADS BASED ON PAST
23 Announcement of Opportunity (1A0) for the EXPERIENCE
E5 microgravity sciences on 188, issued in September
E 2000. The IAO activity is being co-ordinated by the Considering the limited resources in terms of crew
% International Microgravity Strategic Planning Group ~ time, upmass and downmass, the challenge for the
Q (IMSPG). T wo Canadian scientists were part of two Physical Science Program (PSP) was to build _
(:5: successful proposals. One experiment is on the research payloads, which meet the needs of our .
E Dynamic Surface Deformation Effects in Transition 0 Canadian researchers in an effective manner. Over
g to Oscillatory Thermocapillary Flow in Liquid the years, the PSP has gained expertise in speciﬁc
3 Bridge of High Prandtl Number Fluid whose scientiﬁc equipment that contributed to extend the
E Canadian member is Dr. Kawaji of the University of knowledge of our scientists in the ﬁelds of material
5 Toronto. The other project is on the Inﬂuence of science, ﬂuid science and protein crystal growth.
Vibrations on Diffusion in Liquids with Canadian Another very important expertise developed over the
participant Prof. Z. Saghir of Ryerson University. past ten years is the understanding of the impact of g-
jitter 0n experimentsl‘z. These studies were possible
Since this is the ﬁrst time an IAO has been conducted using a magnetically levitated isolation platform
in microgravity sciences, much was learned by all ~ known as MIM (Microgravity vibration Isolation
involved and a certain level of coordination will be Mount) on two programs, one lasting two years on
required in order to establish the numerous bilateral Mir, and one on a shuttle mission in 1997.
agreements necessary for the eventual shared use of
’ the ISS resources to conduct these experiments. Based on that gained expertise, it was determine that
Collaborations will mean more opportunities for an effective use of the double locker for physical
scientists from all partner agencies. science on 188 is to devote the bottom part of the
locker to the isolation system and the top part for
small visiting payloads.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5",". interface for tele-operation in addition to providing
An advantage of small payloads is the shorter isolation from vibrations.
development timeframe, which enables them to . .
integrate state-of-the-art technology at the time of ' ,
ﬂight opportunity. ’ . .
In line with these niches of expertise, the PSP is
developing three science payloads and the MIM aterC°°1edShmud
support facility, which are described brieﬂy below. -
MIMBU: Isolation platform and more I g
For the 188, the PSP will develop a fourth generation (3382’?) f
M of MIM called the MIM Base Unit (MIMBU). ' ) “ m i MIMBU
2 e
g The MIM technology, which is based on a magnetic l 4!” ""’4’ I
g Ievitation system and uses wide gap Lorentz force F“ "" __,,,~*1__,.J
21 actuators, is capable of isolating experiments with no \ , I ~r .
? practical limit on mass and achieving attenuation, for Igléslgncm /1<§2n51"") .
a vibrations from 0.01 Hz to 300Hz of up to 40 dB. ' ( ' ) \ / '
g At low frequencies (< 0.01 Hertz) space platforms Fi ure 2. MIMBU eonce t
3 such as the shuttle or space stations provide a unique, g ° p .
S _ .5 .
g “ear . free {81.1 d(10 g1: . enV‘rogmeft' :36?“ As shown in Figure 3, MIMBU will be integrated
5 eXper‘ence game 0“ t 6 Space 5 u“ e 2}“ ‘r as . into an ISS EXPRESS mold. The EXPRESS rack ‘
E shown that many Of these experiments are Will rovide the interface between MIMBU and the
S; signiﬁcantly affected by the vibration levels on the p . . .
e . . . 188 for commanding and data handling. Nominally,
5» space platforms. Vibrations are drlven by on-board .
2 . . . . the MIMBU W111 be teleoperated from a computer
a act1v1t1es such as attitude control systems, thermal locate d at the CS A Pa 10a d TeleO eration Centre
Eu: control systems, air conditioning systems, crew (PTOC) y p _ .
E activity and by operation of the experiments ' i
<2) themselves. The vibration levels are ampliﬁed by the ﬁ
0 structural dynamics of the spacecraft, resulting in ' :57‘
E ' . . . . . . .3 .\
m Vibration env1ronments characterized by milll-g (10 i
z 0 . . I ?\I‘ I \ .-- /
g D) acceleration levels. These acceleration levels are {\q$\ l! / I?)
E sufficient to cause signiﬁcant disturbances to many £‘§i§,{<ab\§ ' f1
‘2 microgravity experiments, especially those with ﬂuid _, JR‘RBVLVB/ I
(f: phases, Wthh includes many material selence II 4/9/34‘ Eb“ E}
E experiments. "" ‘N§§% ' mﬁin§
E The MIMBU concept is illustrated in Figure 2. The Mw~/%\§\£/ 34kg.
é isolation base is installed into the lower half of an ~Agf/ §§F\I 1
Q enclosure, referred to as the MIMBU shroud, which ~V~l@4’ ""
is the size of a shuttle double mid-deck locker. The ~~f‘g‘Q ?ﬁi ‘-
top half of the shroud is reserved for experiment :\\""/ -: 5E7” .
payloads. The whole assembly has been designed to iv /
accommodate any payloads designed to fit in a single ’ 71/
mid-deck locker. The walls of the shroud are water-
:igij‘iimggt prov‘de a rad‘am’e heat smk t0 the Figure 3: MIMBU in EXPRESS Rack conﬁguration
Mm MM
electrical interfaces, power, cooling, data processing for the vibration isolatiorll) s stem devglo ed b
capabilities, data storage and communication years . . y p y
CSA for the ESA Fluld Sc1ence Laboratory (FSL). \
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","Wm WM“ Was .movmed 0”. the ﬁrst generation
' 1~ ,2»; M1crograv1ty Vibration Isolation Mount (MIM-l).
’ tmifﬁgegi The ATEN project started in February 1999 with a
g?“ $.33“: four feasibility studies were contracted to look at
i‘ E‘s“ _ possible ways to meet the scientific requirements. ,
EVE; “3‘ ATEN was defined taking into consideration the
j' :3 79wékx interface and 188 EXPRESS Rack constraints.
étMm% ‘wmmMmmwmv
E. 5:5; fggxi‘:‘z 1; Kingston Ontario was selected to. deSIgn and bu11d
g :5 7§4§W§&w‘, the ATEN ﬂlght and ground umts as well as an
g ~. 21: 9 Engineering Model (EM).
é Figure 4: FSL showing the MVIS Isolation volume The ATEN furnace is designed to meet a wide range . ‘
5 of scientiﬁc requirements. It will allow investigators
3 Indeed the FSL facility will see the integration of the . to do fundamental studies in material science
g MIM technology called MVIS (Microgravity (diffusion, Ostwald ripening, particle pushing) as
a Vibration Isolation Subsystem) into the core design well as improving material processing techniques to .
:3 of ESA’S FSL and thus provide an improved grow semi-conductors, ceramics and glasses of better ’
f3: microgravity environment for researchers that will quality. To accomplish these goals, ATEN will
; use the FSL. The need for a quiet environment is not provide different modes of operation such as
§ only important for the experiment itself but also for isothermal, gradient heating and melt zone heating.
3: the optical diagnostic equipment within FSL. Figure
“2"" 4 shows the isolated volume, which includes the ATEN Will be able to process a specimen of up to
E diagnostic tools in the Upper part and the 10mm in diameter and 80 mm in length. The furnace
E Experimental Container in the lower part. In will operate in an isothermal mode at temperatures
é exchange, BSA will provide Canada with 5% of the varying from 100°C to 1300°C, and in a temperature.
5 total BSA use Of FSL. gradient mode with a gradient varying from 5°C/cm
(E; to 50°C/cm. The facility will also provide a melt zone
% ATEN: Material Science furnace for 188 ' mode. The temperature accuracy will be within
a ‘ 10.25 % at high temperature with a repeatability of
Q CSA is presently developingthe fourth generation of 11°C. This accuracy will be obtained using
(<0: the CSA’s locker-sized furnace payload called ATEN instrumented samples, thermal modelling as well as
‘2‘ (Advanced Thermal ENvironment). calibration. Figure 5 shows a solid model of a
‘3 sample. . '
e; In 1992, the first generation furnace QUELD I ﬂew .
g on STS-42 with Canadian Astronaut Steve MacLean.
5 Experiments on Liquid Diffusion in microgravity m“;
were performed as part of the CANEX-Z program. ”‘3“:{1 .1
QUELD I was made of a furnace core and a quench ”git“
block. Samples were loaded manually one by one ’ - / 4,0
where 40 samples were processed during the mission. 9
In 1993, the QUEST furnace ﬂew on the shuttle as a «a . ’
Get Away Special (GAS) payload. The payload was .
an automated multi-furnace facility. //""I
From 1996 until 1998, 205 samples were processed t, ‘
in the UELD II furnace on Mir. UELD II was a . . ‘
semi-afrltomated furnace facility. (The QUELD II Flgure 5: SOhd mOde] Of an ATEN sample
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","One of the keys to successful experiments in space is Most protein crystallization on the ground is done
extensive ground preparation. The great advantage of with the hanging drop method and large matrices.
ATEN is that it is a compact payload and Ground The hanging dr0p method is hard to’ reproduce in a
Units (GU) will be made available to scientists for facility designed for space ﬂight and because of mass
mission preparation and experiment fine-tuning. and volume restrictions, most space ﬂight
experiments have used smaller matrices than are
ATEN will ﬁt into the Microgravity vibration commonly used on the ground.
Isolation Mount Base Unit (MIMBU) enclosure. For ~
ground-based experiments, ATEN will be Operated After consultation with our scientific community,
with a laptop computer and an external power supply. basic scientific requirements were developed in
. regards to the Canadian payload. Based on those,
. The Critical Design Review (CDR) was held in four different concepts were presented and their
October 2003 and will require a Delta CDR to prototypes evaluated.
# finalize the design before going into the
3, manufacturing phase. In 2004, scientiﬁc ground The concept selected can host more than 1000
g experiments will be performed using the Engineering samples of a volume between 2 and 20 “L for vapour ' g
g Model (EM) to better characterized .the furnace diffusion experiments using a cold point activation
27 capabilities. The manufacturing of ﬂight and ground mechanism. The temperature set point will. be
$ units is planned to start in late 2004 for an earliest selectable from two settings, 4-6 °C and 20-22 °C ‘
<2 ﬂight opportunity in late 2006' within i1.°C of the set point. The facility will ﬁt on
g the MIM base unit. For ground controls, the facility
§ Samplecmp . . will. be able to produce crystals on the ground. The
E: . {7 mama innovative system fer the activation of crystallization
3 , “qu ' ' is presently under investigation to reduce technical
é Fmace /;§:\ .\ risk. If the program receives approval, the design and '
8“ . *‘ i. ._ ‘51: xx 7‘“ manufacturing for groand and ﬂight unitssheuld start
a 7. ey/ﬁg i ‘ w} in ate 2004 for an earliest ﬂight opportunity in 2007.
:9 »N x? Waggfgi
é __7 n fwefqgﬁeéi #77 3/243? ”@7783; SURF: Fluid Science on 188
E 5 V *,« qig; WW7 ~i3’e’5\ ~‘ ’ SURF is the Canadian Fluid Science experimental
8 W "" re‘ W 3' 1 d f 188 A ' d b f c d‘
m 5 5 'E/ . ’ 1W pay 0a or. . s mentione e ore,‘ ana mm
33 “z“ E9 ‘4 g M“ selentists Will have access to the Fluld Scrence
r; ’. $9,, . Laboratory (FSL)3 developed by BSA in exchange
3 Camidge ' 5‘7 ~05; Quench Block ~ for CSA contribution of the MVIS isolation system.
E 4 EM” This will provide a unique opportunity for Canadian
3 ’ researchers to use the state-of-the-art FSL facility.
2;: Figure 6: ATEN Critical Design by Millenium
E Biologix Inc. To prepare for this opportunity, the CSA .is
g organizing a Fluid Science workshop speciﬁcally to
Li PROSPECT: Protein Crystallization on 188 identify the Canadian scientific interest in using the
E FSL.~ Based on that and other consultation activities,
Q Based on the CSA’s recent achievements with the CSA will either develop an Experimental Container
Chinese mission and considering the . strategic to be integrated on FSL: or develop a Canadian
decisions adopted by different agencies regarding experimental payload ‘0 be mounted on the MIM
their PCG programs, the CSA is assessing its position Base unit. We should complete consultation and
regarding its PCG program. The following describes conclude scientiﬁc requirements by the end Of 2004
the strategy followed for the past three years to in order to start a Phase A concept in early 2005. g
. prepare for the PCG experiments on the 188 using a ' ‘
Canadian experimental payload. PROSPECT
. (PROtein SPace- Enhanced Crystallization
Technology) is Canada’s protein crystal growth
facility, specifically aimed at conducting experiments
important to the Canadian biotechnological industry.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","W ssh”:
. ”N ‘htwww
PSP’S past experience has taught us that more effort i‘ tyimeahtgéi
which has been shown to have a huge impact on hmhihhhh‘tw
mpiemamh This spechhcahy hhhtwgi
Growth (PCG) Mission Support Centre (Mscf. The ' eﬂmawgwea
purpose of this centre is to increase the scientific iﬁwigm1”§
mission by providing a more coordinated and .; within”
g for pre and post ﬂight activities, as well as full-length g; ti““”“‘”www 1? g%%:11'§1:“1
g ﬂight simulation and mission-concurrent ground 1: ' 1 1: hgﬁigggﬁjk
% experiments. The centre was used for the STS-107 t“ "" "" E1111:
2' PCG mission and showed a clear contribution for . giﬁyhrrfteh” §§th '
(2 mission success. Unfortunately, this assessment was 11 fwfhwiﬁ ‘ég géi‘tw .
E only possible on ground activities as all ﬂight fi’tj'“ 1?: 1
i samples were lost Many lssons learned will :“Meiihgm
, contribute to chanceh the of he next tmwhﬁ
3% hmwﬁghah thjkﬁze’h""
E 1” Preparauon for the ISS “tlhzatlonh the Canadlan 3%? fﬁhkhﬁw
8“ Space A gency undertook the construction Of the . ' w» . ,. %%&\M‘\s
E Payload Mission Support Centre (PMSC). Since the
‘2“ 188 is a remote laboratory and because the Figure 7: The EXPRESS Rack/Spacelab Mock-up in
E participation of the Principal Investigator (P1) to the Payload Support Centre (PSC)
E conduct his/her experiment is crucial for success, the .
5 Canadian scientists will access their experiment Next to the PSC, the PTOC provides real time
8 during the mission through tele-operation. . operation support during a mission. The PTOC is
(32 equipped with consoles that use the NASA
% The PMSC is responsible for providing pre—mission Telescience Resource experiment Kit (TReK)
(é ‘ and real time mission support for CSA sponsored software, keysets to monitor the voice loops and a
g payloads that will be operated on the International video system to receive/record the 188 video feed.
:5 Space Station. The PMSC began operations in The TReK is a PC based software that will allow
<2: February of 2001 to support the Canadian experiment near-real time monitoring and commandng of the
4: Hoffman Reﬂex, 0r H—Reﬂex launched on the ISS payloads.
g 5A.1 mission in March 2001. It is composed of the .
E Payload Support Centre (PSC) (Figure 7) co—located The PMSC also includes a virtual component that
8 with the Payload Telescience Operation Centre . will provide to the Principal Investigator easy access
(PTOC) (Figure 8). t0 the scientiﬁc data on a near-real time basis through
a web site. With the consent of the Principal
- The PSC is providing pre-mission support for the Investigator, data received from the 188 through the
certification of payloads, mission simulation and TReK software will be processed and continuously
payload/EXPRESS Rack interface veriﬁcation as posted on that web site. ‘
well as engineering support during missions.
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","23*“ “£3” 19m»:
x d»: e
mgmgt
‘ ” \tiﬁaetﬁzw’”
izeeex m$§§§ew§éw ~i «w t,~ ~ REFERENCES
wwuwmnmmww‘” g . t .
???%xwm , t 1. R. A. Herring et. 211., ‘Recent Measurements of
. Eggaeﬁiﬁzimg "" i : 7 Experlmental Sensmwty t0 g-Jitter and Their .
iéﬁgwww‘ggﬂ ‘ ; Sigmﬁcance to 138 FaC111ty Development”
m “eh m .-
3%?“ ”j M 7 ME. WM, m I » “Em 2. B. V. Tryggvason et. al., “The Vibration
, » 5M“ g“ ' l Envu'onment on the International Space Station.
“' 2%,; g W ‘ng Wm It’s Significance t0 Fluid Based Experlments’.
. y, H; 5? 1“”va gggg fjg2:71;:jﬁwﬂ Acta ASU‘O. 48(2-3) (2001), 59-70. ‘
"" S “ ‘ a 3"" W i #33331
9, ‘ Figure 8: The PTOC 3. T. Dewandre and H. Mundorf, “The Fluid
é Science Laboratory And ~ Its Experiment
N. ‘ .
g OPERATIONAL APPROACH AND Container Program On Columbus” 54th Int’l
21 OPPORTUNITIES FOR COLLABORATION Astronautical Federation, Bremen (29 Sept- 3 .
$ Oct 2003) IAC-O3-J.6.04
8 The operational approach for 188 is based on the ~
E cost-effective balance between the use of Common 4. AM- Sledd and CW. Mueller, “EXPRESS Rack
§ - System Operating Cost (CSOC) resources, ‘ Overview” American Institute of Aeronautics
§ transportation costs and the needs of the scientiﬁc and Astronautics AIAA-99-0313
CV3 .
2 community. ‘
E 5. A. Berinstain, P. Gregory and RA. Herring,
g As shown in ﬁgure 9, the MIM Base Unit will remain “Canada’s Space Protein Crystal growth Program
Q» permanently on—orbit mounted in an ISS EXPRESS prepares for 188” Journal of Crystal Growth, 232
g» Rack while small experimental payloads will “visit” (2001) 450—457
E for one or more increment periods. MIMBU will only
0 . .
ES be used by Canadian payloads part of the time.
E Therefore, MIMBU will be made available for
o internatlonal collaboration. .
t3 . .
<c . .
2 ~ . ~ :r . .. 2.004200520062007 2003 2009. 53919:“
2 mwm. pw-~¢«  H 1
< ~ 2 ‘ ""~ .fv-{7:xﬁﬁﬁﬁgﬂfﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁiﬁﬁ
(<20: ATENWatel-ials) : . _ ’ 111111
5 momma, T 1 T1
2 SURE~(FIuids) . ~ “ I I
Q . ' . W ‘. 753 f C 1.? ‘ .. "" I 13f§~:~i:‘:”t::. 1.1351351:
3 "" “ ~:~ ; * ’ ’ ~ ‘7 Eff ‘ ’
Figure 9. CSA’s ISS payloads upmass and downmass
strategy
CONCLUSIONS
CSA’s approach is expected to be a powerful cost
and resource utilization strategy for the support of .
physical sciences in microgravity on the 188. ~
However, with the present delays in station assembly, .
collaboration will be instrumental to provide ﬂight .
opportunities to the scientiﬁc community either on
188 or on other lon g duration microgravity platforms.
8 .
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","é

o .

o .

“1
Q

E

to ' .
(x! _
S

V—i

O .
Q .
on

3-4

0.

CV3

. Q

“3 I ~
0

3-4
‘3
E

8"" _
E

E

O .

(\1

if ‘ ..

g. - .

2 ' _
Q

0

O4

Lu

E

Z

LU

U

LU

O

<

9-1

(A

Z .

O

E

O .

a

< .

m

<

Z .

>. .
‘9 .
""U

a)
v-o K .

(<3

.2

Q

3

o

Q .

"
