"","x"
"1","The Fluid Science Laboratory on the 188 Columbus Module
Performances and Operations
Giorgio TRINCHEROI, Mario CARDANOI, Emanuele PENSAVALLEI, Edoardo BASSANO2, Pasquale
DELL’AVERSANAZ, Marcello LAPPAZ, Matteo TACCONI3
1Thales Alenia Space Italia, Torino (Italy), giorgio.trinchero@thalesaleniaspace.com
2MARS Center, Napoli (Italy), <surname>@marscenter.it
3 ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk (The Netherlands), matteo.taoconi@esa.int
Abstract
The Fluid Science Laboratory (FSL) is an element of the ESA Microgravity Facilities for Columbus program,

designed to operate on-orbit Within the Columbus module of the International Space Station (ISS).The FSL
supports scientiﬁc microgravity experiments in thOe ﬁeld of ﬂuid physics; it distributes standard utilities and
speciﬁc services and retransmits images, science and housekeeping data. Each experiment is hosted into an
Experiment Container, designed under the Science Coordinator direction.The FSL is one of the most complex
microgravity laboratory never built. Based on multi-user capabilities, integrating very sensitive optical diagnostics,
hosting the exchangeable largest experiment containers ever designed, the FSL represents the leading edge of the
European technology. The possibility to ground control it totally ensures the independence of the experiment
conduction from the on-board creW.In the last years, the FSL Operations Team, composed by Payload Developers
and User Support & Operation Centers experts, worked jointly to prepare the ﬂight operations and the related
products to operate the facility.This paper intends to illustrate the peculiarity of the FSL, aimed at the exploitation
of its scientiﬁc performances for future generations of experiments, and the operations activities that are making
the laboratory ready to work.
1. The International Space Station 2. FSL: a scientiﬁc European [88 payload
The 188 enables utilization activities in the ﬁelds of The FSL facility is a multi-purpose modular facility
physical and life sciences, space science, Earth designed for conducting ﬂuid science experiments in
observation and technology innovation. In addition, space. Its project is one of the primary efforts of BSA
commercial research and development, novel services participation to the 188.
(such as education and outreach) and innovative A huge number of European industries and scientists
commercial use (such as advertising and broadcasting) participate to the FSL realization phases, from
are also activities Which beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from use feasibility to design and utilization.
of the capabilities of the Station. The FSL is designed to be integrated in the Columbus
The utilization of the Station by users started With module for launch and for 10 years on-orbit operation
experiments carried out on the Zvezda service module onto the 188. The FSL consists of different modules
and Will continue With facilities and resources and equipment functionally and operationally
becoming increasingly available throughout the rest of integrated into one International Standard Payload
the assembly phase. Routine utilization Will then be Rack (ISPR).
available for at least ten years following completion of Adequate conditioning and routing of the Columbus
assembly. resources is needed in order to support the following
The 188 offers: main FSL system functions:
- the capability to perform an experiment or - power conversion and distribution

observation program over an extended period of - thermal control and ﬁre detection

time in weightless conditions - commanding and monitoring
- the capability to perform iterative research on a - communication and data processing, including data

short timescale through the provision of regular & Video recording and playback

access to and return from the Station - services for experiments: stimuli & diagnostics,
- the provision of access to a signiﬁcant level of resources and interfaces

resources
- the permanent presence of crew
- an extensive range of facilities to enable activities

in a large number of utilization ﬁelds.

"
"2","' 4 accommodation of individual Experiment Container.
‘4 m- arjm-«ﬁ ”"" \"" j t; “ ‘ The Experiment Container (EC) is the real core of the
\ ~ ~33: rf£iﬂ;§~% ‘ facility, containing the ﬂuid cell and all the
\\~ _, _> .5"" 5 ' '4?! ‘ equipment dedicated to the experiment itself. This
V i '37,. ‘~—~;‘.$1£;f:;kl,f ‘5 part is completely experiment dependent; it is
i -‘ *‘j1"";f""”k‘ conceived by the scientist to include all the hardware
J W ,gc and software to support the speciﬁc experimental
' *- “I » features. The EC is hosted inside, and supported by,
- ' ‘ in the lower left part of the FSL module, the Central
,1 \ ‘ _ ""' / Experiment Module (CEML), providing all the
"" , l,» - "" needed interfaces to the EC, and supporting part of
the FSL optical equipment and microgravity
measurement. The CEML is part of the Facility Core
. .. . . Equipment (FCE).
F1g.1 FSL pos1t10n 1ns1de the Columbus module Other components of the FCE are:
- the Central Experiment module Upper (CEMU),
The FSL can be operated in a fully automatic 0r containing other optical equipment, and
semi-automatic mode by the ﬂight crew or remotely - the Optical Diagnostic Module (ODM),
controlled from ground in Telescience mode. This supporting optical diagnostics 0n the ﬂuid cell.
essentially resulted in a highly modular concept
allowing for continual upgrades of the system The Master Control Unit (MCU) drives the general
capabilities. management of all the FSL resources.
On May 2007 the Fluid Science Laboratory, after 9 Experiment images are recorded by various cameras
years of development carried out at Thales Alenia inside the FCE 0r mounted on the front side of the
Space Italia, was ﬁnally integrated into the Columbus FCE (Front Mounted Cameras — FMC's). The Video
module and is now ready for the launch, currently Management Unit (VMU) supports all the
planned in December 2007. experiment Video images collection and
The FSL Facility Responsible Center (MARS, Napoli, management.
Italy) has the possibility to control totally the The Lap Top Unit (LTU) represents the interface
laboratory and its experiments from ground. With the astronaut crew.
Other support equipment is represented by the Power
_. . ' Control Unit (PCU), Fire Detection and Suppression
- (FDS) Panel, Stowage Container, Work Bench,
i. '- Avionic Air Assembly (AAA), Secondary Water
' '1 _ __' :1? loop Assembly (SWLA).
:- : 5, - ‘33 1:}; I 11"".
i \Eh {uﬁgﬁﬁ‘
I- z. - . l .. r-gﬁiﬂl
*7; -_ .5. J, . *Wi _ ﬂu” .._- .I... f:
-._I : . E 1; Eiﬁh‘ £;:iiﬁﬂ
. .F i .13 L-‘ﬁ'igiz-g . . Em lzrﬂilﬂlii
- 41.- -l .1 _!§“-—-.=~_-‘=s 33‘
. ﬂ! ‘39.; : Af/ ‘
e“ ' Er;— l‘ ﬁlm! I
. - - -. .- . 2f! aﬂ... .E l:
_ ' ""aﬁlg-Lﬁ
\a]|a=allag)w
1""”- th? __.-.;-.-»’:-""‘
""I-I-E-
Fig.2 FSL integrated into the Columbus module
Fig.3 FSL subsystems
3. FSL facility overview 4. FSL utilities
In order to allow the execution of a Wide range of The FSL is designed to support the EC With the
experiments, proper stimuli and optical diagnostics are following utilities and services:
provided by means of a set of interfaces and resources _ Electrical power up to 300 Watt
in a well-deﬁned area inside the FSL volume for the _ Low Rate Data (RS—422 and Mil-Bus-1553)

"
"3","- Video Interfaces and High Rate Data on electrical The main function of the FCE is to support the optical
media modules and to keep them stably aligned.
- Water cooling up to 420 Watt of heat rej ection The exchangeable Experiment Container is
- Discrete Commands accessible by extracting the CEML.
- Discrete Monitors The main design requirement of the FCE is the
- Thermo-electrical device driver interfaces minimization of possible deformations induced by
- Stepper Motor driver interfaces l-g t0 O-g transition, thermal gradients, launch and
The science data and images generated inside the EC on-orbit loads / Vibrations.
and the cameras (as well as the FSL housekeeping The ODM drawer contains all the main optical
telemetry data) are routed to the Columbus for diagnostics Which are distributed on the two faces of
downlink t0 the ground. TWO downlink channels are the ODM plate (Upper and Lower).
available: The ODM contains:
- lOW rate, handled by the MCU, mainly intended for - equipment for Visual and interferometric
housekeeping and lOW rate scientiﬁc data, observation and diagnostics
and high rate, handled by the VMU at olumbus - illumination (laser)
Video interface, mainly intended for Video images, and - interferometers: ESPI, differential, holographic,
for high rate scientiﬁc data. Schlieren, Wollaston.
The baseline for all the FSL experiment operations is The CEML drawer contains:
the Telescience operation. The scientist interacts With - the Experiment Container With EC functional
the on-orbit facility from his/her User Home Basis interfaces (power, data, cooling) and a feed
(UHB) by sending telecommands and monitoring through panel for the EC interface connections
telemetry data and images downlinked t0 the ground. - baseplate for Optical Reference Target (ORT),
Crew time is one of the most valuable resources used for calibration
on—board 0f the 188: the FSL is designed to minimize - laser and White light sources for background and
the required crew intervention, While providing the sheet illumination (With suitable optical systems
scientist With a highly ﬂexible facility. and moving prisms to create two perpendicular
movable light sheets in the EC)
The science support to the EC is provided by the FCE. - light openings to the ODM
The FCE is located at the left-hand side of the FSL rack - CCD cameras
and is composed by the ODM (Optical Diagnostic - tiltable mirror assemblies
Module), the CEMU (Central Experiment Module - microgravity measurement assembly.
Upper) and the CEML (Central Experiment Module The CEMU drawer contains:
Lower). - supporting diagnostic equipment
These three modules are extractable and constitute a - laser source for light scattering applications
complex optical bench supporting optical diagnostics - equipment for light sheet thickness variation
for the ﬂuid cell including: - mirror assemblies
- Velocimetry in xy plane - Mirror Front Panel (MFP), interface to Front
- Velocimetry in XZ plane Mounted Camera.
- Front side Viewing (-y aXis) With White light
background illumination
- Bottom side Viewing (-z aXis) With White light
background illumination - ' I
- Electronic Speckle Pattern interferometry (ESPI) DDM _ ug- I': - E n
- Wollaston interferometry in 2 perpendicular * 5i i
directions -- "" .
- Schlieren interferometry in 2 perpendicular CEML! l I '~ 3:
directions ""2 - ”g...“ ""
— Holography interferometry in 2 perpendicular H: {:3 ”JEU-
directions CEML 74;??? l'rl '=
- Light-sheet illumination and imaging. l: 1!; '-
The above diagnostics is supported by the following l-- - . ' ' 3
light sources: 3
- 2 White light sources for ﬂuid cell illumination
above and behind (WLSA and WLSB) . .
- 2 White light sources for l-t0-3O mm White light F1g.4 The FSL FCE mam components
sheet gegeran‘m (LSXYW and LSXZW) , The Video Management Unit (VMU) is in charge of
' 2, laser d10des for Q.l-t0-5 mm monochromatlc the FSL Video images handling; it is capable of
hght sheetgenerat10n(LSXYM and LSXZM) multiplexing and processing all analog and digital,
' 1 690-nm laser dIOde for h.ght scattermg (LDLS) monochrome and colour Video data generated in the
' 1 532-nm laser source for 1nterfer0metry FCE cameras, in the Front Mounted Cameras 0f FSL
(LSODM)' and in the EC internal cameras.

"
"4","It additionally handles science data received from the The camera functions are started and conducted by
Experiment by the MCU. ground, through the VMU. The recorded images of
The VMU supports real time onboard and ground the FMC’s are transferred to the VMU - if a digital
monitoring (compressed downlink), short term data Video camera is used - or they are stored for
storage (2 hard disks) and long term data storage transportation to ground if photographic ﬁlm is the
(digital recorder) for later data retrieval & replay and storage medium.
downlink/evaluation. Up to three Video channels can be
recorded simultaneously. 5. Typical experiments that can be performed
The high rate downlink Channel is used for data on FSL
transmission to ground; S—Video transmission to the The Fluid Science Laboratory is a Class-l facility that
FSL laptop for real—time onboard monitoring is has purposely been deVised to perform Fluid Physics
available as well. experiments in weightlessness conditions. The FSL
Temporal resolution (frame rate) and spatial resolution experiment concept is based upon a modular concept
(number of pixel and lines) can be adapted to the user that foresees a dedicated EC for each experiment.
needs either by the camera or by the VMU. Any further Only one EC at a time can be operated in the facility,
compression/eneoding can be performed in real-time. but more than one (typically 2 or 3) EC can be stowed
A JPEG data compressor With selectable compression in Columbus each mission increment.
rate is available. The scientist has to conceive its experiment
The VMU delivers appropriate trigger signal to all considering that it shall be entirely conﬁned Within 3
cameras in parallel When external timing is required. dedicated EC, Which shall be provided With all those
Camera commanding is performed Via a serial interface tools that are experiment—speciﬁe, i.e., not supplied
to every camera by the VMU based on commands from by FSL. In this respect it must be noted that, While
the MCU. FSL is equipped With very sophisticated optical
diagnostics, most of the read—out capabilities, Which
The Mierogravity Vibration Isolation Subsystem are strictly experiment-related, must be supplied by
(MVIS): actively isolates the FSL FCE from the the EC itself.
environment Vibrations over the frequency range 0.01 Thus, besides of a speciﬁc Fluid Cell, With its
Hz to 10 Hz. dedicated sensors and mechanisms, the EC shall also
The system is based on siX degree of freedom magnetic contain some experiment-speeiﬁe subsystems and
levitation using Wide gap actuators, Whose magnets are electronics (namely, the Experiment Container
located on the FCE and coils are mounted on the FSL Control Unit, ECCU), Which is typically used for
Rack structure. signal read—out/Conditioning purposes.
The system includes position sensors, Which allow Most of Classical ﬂuid dynamics experiments can be
position and orientation tracking of the FCE relative to performed With FSL, including:
the FSL ﬁxed rack, and accelerometer sub-assemblies, - Rayleigh-Benard convection
for monitoring the FCE and rack accelerations. Both - Marangoni-Benard convection
the accelerometers and the position sensors are used in - Buoyancy and Marangoni convection along free
the active control system. surfaces
The stiffness and damping Characteristics and the - Marangoni migration of inclusions (drops and
control parameters can be programmed over a Wide bubbles)
range to accommodate experiments With Widely - Drop dissolution
ranging mass properties. The forces required at the - Melting and solidiﬁcation fronts dynamics and
eight actuators depend on the mass distribution of the interaction With inclusions
complete system including the experiment. The control - Crystallization
system automatically controls the coil currents to get - Boiling/bubble nucleation
isolation performance; the control gains depend upon - Heat and Mass Transfer
the overall FCE mass properties, and are deﬁned in - Critical Point phenomena
data ﬁles that are uplinked and used by the MVIS - Liquid bridges in ﬂuid or gas matrix
control software. - Electro-hydrodynamics
- Coaleseenee/non-coalescence
The FSL is equipped With 3 Front Mounted Camera - Wetting/non-wetting
(FMC), Which covers requirements not fulﬁlled by the - Interface ageing due to surfactants
standard cameras of the FCE. The FMC is - Mixing
accommodated on the FCE front panel (ODM) during - Fingering (ferromagnetic ﬂuids)
the operational phases of the FSL. - Fluid ﬁlm dynamics
The FMC concept allows the accommodation of - Emulsion dynamics
different (present and future) types of camera, e.g.: - Multilayer system
- High speed camera - Colloids, emulsions and aerosols
- Photographic cameras (analog, digital) With - Particle agglomeration
different formats (multipurpose cameras) - Plasma physics
- Infrared camera Of course the possible experiments that can be
performed With FSL are not limited to the list above;

"
"5","the ability and creativity of scientists can surely ﬁnd a resident in the MCU can drive completely the
lot of original situations involving ﬂuids, Which can be experiment execution; in this case, the performance
tested in microgravity. may be reduced, especially in term of command rates,
For each experiment a speciﬁc set of measurements is having to cope With the limitation of 1 command per
to be performed, according to the relevant ease. second intrinsic to the FSL data bus architecture.
Possible measurements provided by FSL include: Once the EC realization is successfully accomplished,
- Observation the user’s next task is to use the FSL and its
- Veloeimetry experiments. For the utilisation of the European ISS
- Temperature distribution ﬁeld segment, a decentralised organisation is presently
- Composition distribution ﬁeld being set—up, based on the implementation and
- Flow pattern build-up of a harmonised network of European
- Refraction indeX distribution ﬁeld national User Support and Operation Centres
- Surfaee/interfaee deformation (USOC’s) to be integrated Within the decentralised
- Turbidity ISS operational concept.
The FSL optics can be automatically arranged in as In practice, the USOC’s are placed into the context of
much as 88 different optical modes, each characterized the overall European ground infrastructure for the
by a particular interferometry, holography or 188, interfacing both to BSA and to other entities
Visualization set up. participating in 188 operations.
The USOC’s support or are responsible for the

6. FSL experiment operations operations of the ESA scientiﬁc facilities and act as
The operations scenario for the experiments foresees a an interface for the ISS scientiﬁc user.
distribution of tasks and responsibilities among the The USOC’s play an important role in linking the
different ground facilities and the on-board crew, science user community to the ISS utilisation.
taking into account that the baseline of FSL operations With decentralised USOC’s it is ensured that focal
is the Teleseienee approach, i.e. remote monitoring and points for the preparation and the conduction of BSA
commanding from ground, so local monitoring and payload operations are created.
control by astronaut is not expected to be a frequent The centres are outﬁtted With a set of BSA provided
event. In addition, full automatic experiment standard services. This includes the implementation
conduction is envisaged, as well. of communications capabilities (Video, data, voice)
Experiments are run by dedicated software sequences and the provision of Engineering Models and Science
called Experiment Procedures (EP’s). On users’ Reference Models.
request, during execution, the EP can be controlled Depending on the scope of the task assigned to a
modiﬁed, started and stopped again. Depending on the USOC, it is a Facility Responsible Center (FRC) or a
experiment features, the sequences may be designed to Facility Support Center (FSC).
run in one of the following ways: The FRC’s have a sufﬁcient knowledge of the
- Fully Automatic: no operator involvement, all functionality of the facilities allocated to them to

experiment sequences and parameters are operate on them during ﬂight. The FRC’s are

pre-mission deﬁned; gathering of data that Will be primarily responsible for operating their payload rack

processed off—line at system level. The FSL FRC is the MARS Center,
- Semi-Automatie: limited operator involvement, located in Napoli, Italy.

experiment sequences and parameters can be The FSC’s operate a facility at sub-rack level and

either pre-mission deﬁned or modiﬁed in-ﬂight they are evoked for the operations preparation and
- Step—by-Step: under direct control of the PI or of ﬂight execution of individual experiments contained

the on board crew. in the facility.
The Experiment Procedures driving the experiment In case of a requirement for teleseienee from the
execution are composed of “atomic” instructions, user’s home laboratory (as per FSL), the FRC is
performing elementary functions on the single responsible for the interface eo-ordination of the
experiment, and of standard sequence control set-up of an adequately equipped User Home Base
commands (like Go To, Call, Wait ...). The same (UHB) at the scientist’s location. The FRC also
commands are available both to the PI on-ground and provides support for the speciﬁcations for hardware
to the on-board crew. and software and the connectivity of the UHB to the
Although the EP’s are stored and executed in the MCU, ISS ground segment as well as for the UHB
the EC itself may be provided With a dedicated internal certiﬁcation.
processor running experiment speciﬁc software The UHB is deﬁned as the home laboratory of the
(ECSW), Which interacts With the EP. Dedicated user, Which can be equipped to perform online
experiment interfaces can be also installed in the FSL experiment data monitoring or experiment control
Laptop (Experiment HCI, EHCI). from that location. Different from the USOC’s, Which
The EC processor is the recommended solution in case can be considered as permanent institutions, a UHB is
of very complex experiments, especially if strong time an operational centre for a limited duration.
constraints or high processing or commanding rates are The UHB’s represent a possibility for individual
required. If the EC does not provide sufﬁcient software scientist to participate in the experiment planning and
capabilities to run its own dedicated software, the EP re-planning cycles and to follow and support the

"
"6","experiment operations Without necessarily being pre—deﬁned procedures. The FRC is responsible
located at a USOC. during the mission, for issuing authorized commands
Direct real—time control of the FSL is implemented by to FSL during predeﬁned periods, or ""operational
using the infrastructure implemented at the FRC. Windows"".
Remote operations are possible Within an operational The FRC monitors and veriﬁes as well that the
Window, Within a resource framework deﬁned in the commands have been executed and have produced
time line on the basis of a set of previously validated the desired results.
commands. The user is able to monitor all payload data FSL operations are performed under the
entitled to receive according to the scientiﬁc objectives responsibility of the assigned FRC. They ensure that
of the research. throughout the operations the payload stays Within
FSL commanding may be performed either With direct the agreed resource framework.
""ad hoc"" commands from the USOC’s and associated Whenever anomalies 0r faults are detected by this
UHB’s, from the Columbus Control Center (Col—CC) monitoring process, the PRC informs the Col—CC and
or from the crew appropriate contingency procedures are performed.
The Col—CC 0r crew can issue FSL commands in
response to contingencies 0r anomalies according to
ww: ARTEMIS \> ﬁiﬁi
a
. _ r T h}:
Columbus % KTV
NASA TDRS .
_... a Russmn
GS ﬁg?"" ESA-HME Ground infrastructure gain... GS
White Sands Pi: pm”
Complex Russian Ground
Stations
Mission C 011t1‘01 Mission Control
Houston centre MOSCOW
MCC-H MCC-M
HOSC I“
‘ 10 Usocs
Kennedy Space ‘
Centre
Cape Canaveral ..
‘ .
0
Fig.5 ESA Ground Segment overview fro the ISS

"
