"","x"
"1","a . ‘
\ ‘ 9’ \ \ -
I 5, ‘ "" Lx
- . v
‘
. 2“ dc
. /
.- #33 . -
' J . .{5 O;
f . .
9&2)” ,, ' ; '
.;_ NG MALT . i5 1
_. .011 ISKY 9'
«aw; ' I - v éCfRAVI
1'.
' ‘K E NRA TIVES I
‘r of l: 1‘, Whisky Creat ' & isky St . ,
. ""1"" - , fa:
. ‘x F.“ -. -.
.. 1 ‘ \‘ ‘ ""-
L” I. I I -'— : .. . -‘ l"". I II 'I‘
1- ‘ 3 ""h .. ‘ -| . r . '
r.‘ , . . “w I 13:; ‘ -. : .#‘$ ‘4‘ (1
. ‘1 ' I [I . 51$"" '1' ”M: I a t I . q.
, ‘ -. ‘¥§' .
: l 0 . , ,4 . - .
f ' '
L :I _ ’ ‘ i f E ‘ l m: ‘ 4
I - a '. w I I h
ii ' ‘I “ ‘
F"" . = , - M4. -

"
"2","ISLAY SINGLE MALT
SCOTCH WHISKY
Introduction
In August 2011, an approach was made to Moet Hennessy USA by a scientiﬁc research company called NanoRacl<s, LLC based in Houston,Te><as,
USA. NanoRacl<s designs and implements research programmes aboard the International Space Station via a Space Act Agreement with NASA,
in conditions of nnicro—gravity, compared to the conditions on Earth. Given its very particular taste proﬁle, the Ardbeg lslay Single Malt Scotch
Whisky was already well known to the scientists of NanoRacl<s, and they had developed an idea, involving some form of experiment, or examination,
of the effect of nnicro—gravity on the behaviour of terpenes, the building blocks of flavour for whisl<y spirits as well as for many other foods and
wines, as research into terpenes in nnicro—gravity was linnited.We were therefore offered an opportunity to participate in this experiment, including
contributing to the design of it, however, our timescale for participation was extremely tight.
We collected a quantity ofArdbeg distillate (the liquid resulting from distillation which is normally ﬁlled into oak barrels for maturation), along with
oak wood shavings from the inside of a charred American White Oak eX—Bourbon barrel, which was due to be despatched from the cooperage
to Ardbeg Distillery on the Island of lslay for ﬁlling with new Ardbeg distillate.These materials were carefully packaged and sent to the NanoRacl<s
scientists in Houston, where they were packaged into their small sample testing system, known as MixStixT'V', which in turn were sent to Kazakhstan
to be loaded on to the Soyuz booster rocl<et destined for the International Space StationA nunnber ofthe MiXStiXTM were also sent to us to use
as controls.
Three days after launch,the MixStiXT'V' were passed overto astronauts aboard the International Space StationAtter an initial period ofacclinnatisation
to the conditions aboard the ISS, in January 2012, the experiment was initiated, as the astronauts broke the glass separating walls in the individual
MixStiXT'V', thus allowing the distillate and the oak wood shavings to come into contact with each other At the same time on Earth, we initiated
the control experiment by breaking the separating wall in my MixStiXT'V' on lslay (which had been sent back to me at Ardbeg Distillery fronn
NanoRacl<’s laboratories in Houston, USA).
The MixStixT'V' vials remained on the International Space Station until September 201 4, ﬁnally returning to the Bail<onur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan
on 12th September 2014.The vials were in conditions of nnicro—gravity, with the distillate and oak wood in contact, for a total of 971 days, orbiting the
Earth 15 times a day during this period.The MiXStiXTM vials were delivered back to Ardbeg in November 2014, after which the distillate from both
the nnicro—gravity and Earth control samples was carefully e><tracted.A range of comparative analyses were then carried out, to determine if there
were any differences between the two sets of samples.
Aims
The key aims of the experiment were as follows:—
(i) To determine if conditions ofnnicro—gravity would have an impact on the range of naturally occurring terpene compounds and on the extraction
ofl<ey flavour—active compounds in oak wood by Scotch nnalt distillate.
(ii) To assess the impact of maturation in conditions ofnnicro—gravity on the flavour proﬁle of oak matured distillate.
(iii) To investigate the presence of novel compounds and flavours in model maturation systems for Scotch nnalt distillate, as a result of conditions
of micro—gravity
The key ﬁndings of the above three ainns would then be considered in conjunction with actual maturation conditions on Earth to investigate
techniques for developing novel flavours in Ardbeg lslay Single Malt Scotch Whisky

"
"3","ISLAY SINGLE MALT
SCOTCH WHISKY
Technical Methodology
MixStixT'V' technology which provides a convenient platform for small scale sample experimentation, is a trade—marked piece of technology used
by NahoRac|<s. Essentially, they are small glass vials which can hold a range of materials; in our case these materials were 6m| ofArdbeg hew spirit
distillate, along with a small quantity of charred oa|< wood shavings (from a once used American oa|< Bourbon barrel), c. 1mm x 1mm x 6cm in
size.The two materials are separated from each other by a glass dividing partition, which is broken by bending the Teflon outside covering ofthe
MixStiXT'V' at time of experiment activation, thus allowing the two separate components to mix togetherThese are illustrated below.
NanoRacks MixStix , -:
i! ‘,i ""i i ilifn H‘ :v r: I ixibw. ii .i "",wm .1, 13' Sir: 15‘ ‘ ‘
'iii: TiI‘ITit'Ji“! .31; i'MH‘UHiJi . :. ‘1 x""; \:—’1/ .7 J
A fir ’ "" a
I "" L. NanoRacks MIxStix
13'0th ‘T 3‘ ‘.' VIM 4). n Wi-w; i...”‘.'$
w Q1.
MixStIx Enclosure
livht iz’i :3 N :7 :1. .2Ii'-. Wm! 'i :ii.’ Hi) .""'i
Huh? Ln: 'i ' IR“ m . ’;1\]i.;.’ t‘v,‘ .zi: i‘. F ~- Q 9 ‘
a r
/ 3‘"" w ‘ ""‘ NanoRacks Mletlx
Ti r lg. an9 tubes mm 3 ievels of containment
~ '2,
NANORACKS ‘MixStix’ Small Scale Experimentation Platform
An examination of both International Space Station and control (Earth) samples was carried out by three distinct types of analyses, hamely gas
chromatography (GC) for major volatile congeher ahalysis, high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) for key maturation related congeher
analysis, and orgaholeptic assessment (hosihg and tasting) to determine spirit character In addition to these, a more detailed proﬁle of components
in the distillate was obtained using headspace solid phase micro—extraction combined with gas chromatography —mass spectrometry (GC—MS).
The GC and HPLC analyses were carried out by both ourselves and an independent laboratory to provide ihdepehdeht validation of results.
The orgaholeptic assessment was only carried out by ourselves due to the very limited quantities of liquid, and the very specialised technique of
GC—IVIS was only carried out by the independent laboratory
GC —Aha|ysis carried out with an AgilehtTechhologies 7890 Gas Chromatogram with flame ionisation detector
HPLC —Ahalysis carried out with an AgilehtTechhologies 1260 High Pressure Liquid Chromatogram with multiple wavelength detector
GC—IVIS —Ahalysis carried out at an independent |aboratory using aThermoTrace GC—IVIS.
Orgaholeptic Assessment — multiple micro—gravity and control samples were compared in the sensory |aboratory using Ardbeg ‘tulip’ shaped
hosihg and tasting glasses, for both triangle tests (in which three ‘blihd’ glasses are compared, two ofwhich contain one sample, and one the other
sample) and for detailed aroma and flavour descriptionsThe results were collated to assess for any flavour differences.

"
"4","% 9W
ISLAY SINGLE MALT
SCOTCH WHISKY

Results & Discussion
The NahoRac|<s’ MixStixT'V' provided an opportunity to send some materials, hamely hew ma|<e distillate and barrel oa|< wood shavings, up into
space to understand the effects on terpehes ahd whis|<y distillateWhile it is clear that the preparation of the oak wood samples, required to ﬁt
them into the MiXStiXTM, led to a set of conditions which did not perfectly recreate the surface area to volume ratios which would actually exist
in a 200 litre capacity American barrel, it did provide us with the opportunity to assess the potential impact of micro—gravity in a model system.
This has to be borne in mind if attempting to extrapolate the results on to what may happen on the full scale, in a distillery maturation warehouse.
GC analysis of majorvolatile congehers demonstrated no signiﬁcant differences between the International Space Station samples and the control
samples on Earth. Since this group of compounds comprising primarily alcohols, aldehydes, |<etones and esters, are produced during fermentation
and concentrated up, or in some cases, catalysed during distillation,their presence and quantities should have been identical in each set of samples
to start off with.The conditions of micro—gravity on the ISS have hot impacted on their levels, as demonstrated by the similar levels in the Earth
based samples (Table 1.)

Analyte Space station samples Earth ‘control’ samples

Ethyl Acetate 151.4 155.4

Sum of 2— and 3—MethyI—1—Butahol 1236.3 1169.1

2—Methyl—1—Butahol 312.8 295.6

3—Methyl—1—Butahol 923.5 873.5

Total HigherAlcohols 1959.6 1862.5
TABLE 1 MajorVoIatile Congeher Analysis (mg/l @ sample strength)
A more detailed investigation ofthese compounds, along with phenolic compounds, was carried out on our behalf by external whis|<y experts and
scientists, using GC—IVIS. In the resulting chromatogramsthe areas of 75 separate peaks were integrated, most ofwhich were identiﬁed as alcohols,
esters, aceta|s ahd phenolsAgaih, no major differences were found between the ISS and Earth samples. From an Ardbeg perspective, this was
particularly interesting as the conditions on the ISS have hot impacted on the absolute quantities of the various pheholic compoundsThese are
the compounds which contribute the powerful, smoky, medicinal flavours to Ardbeg spirit.
The most signiﬁcant variable between the ISS and Earth samples was discovered when the results of the HPLC analysis of key maturation related
congehers (wood e><tractives) were considered.The absolute concentration ofthese compounds was far higher than would normally be expected
in standard, barrel—matured spirit, almost certainly as a result of the much higher surface area of woody material that the spirit was exposed to in
the MiXStiX. However, when the two samples, ISS and Earth, were compared to each other, the lighih breakdown products — which are the major
flavour active derivatives from oa|< wood — were present in higher concentrations in the control samples than in the space samplesThis indicates
that conditions ofmicro—gravity have ihhibited their extraction from oa|<. Oh the other hand, ellagic acid and gallic acid, which are tahhih breakdown
products, both appeared to be higher in the ISS samplesThe levels ofthese compounds are detailed ihTabIe 2.

"
"5","% 9W
ISLAY SINGLE MALT
SCOTCH WHISKY
Analyte Space Station samples
Syrihgaldehyde 150.9 259.8
TABLE 2 Key Wood Extractives by HPLC (mg/l @ sample strength)
By drilling down further into these results, and subjecting them to some statistical analysis, the relative abundance of the main, easily extractable
lighih breakdown products (vahillih, coniferaldehyde ahd sihapaldehyde) expressed as a percentage of the total wood e><tractives, is broadly
similar in each sample. However, other e><tractives, such as the syrihgyl compounds, are very different in their total abundance, with much lower
percentages in the ISS samplesThis result means that while the overall extraction ofwood—derived compounds is negatively impacted by micro—gravity,
the impact is not equal; the compounds can be subdivided into ‘readily e><tractable’ and ‘less readily e><tractable’.
While it is clear that micro—gravity is inhibiting the release of wood e><tractives, not all compounds are affected equally as would be expected
in normal conditionsThis has resulted in an unusual ratio between the readily extractable compounds and the less readily extractable ones in
the ISS samplesThis offers the intriguing possibility of using the ratios of such compounds as a potential marker to identify ‘Uhusual’ maturation
characteristics, and thus a means ofidehtifyihg for example, spurious age claims in whisl<ies.This possibility may be further investigated by the Scotch
Whisky Research Institute.
For studies such as this, where we are examining the impact of differing conditions on either model systems, or on the full scale in actual barrels,
the key question is always ‘What does this actually mean for the flavour?’, so the orgaholeptic analysis was of great interest to usThe results from
the key volatile congehers, wood e><tractives ahd phehols analysis did not lead us to believe that from an orgaholeptic perspective, there would
be large differences between the ISS and control samples. However, when we ﬁnally hosed and tasted the samples in the sensory laboratory,
the results were unexpected.
Triangle tests gave a high number of correct responses, with almost all participants picking out a difference between the ISS and control samples.
When we examined the actual aroma and flavour proﬁles,the differences between the two were as remarkable as they were unexpected; all tasters
described the Earth control samples as being of the general Ardbeg whisl<y style, while the ISS samples displayed a quite different set of flavours.
These have been summarised in the detailed descriptions below.
Control Sample — a.b.v. 58.4%, reduced to 26% for tasting
Aroma —Very woody, hints of cedar wood, sweet smoke and aged balsamic vinegar Hints of raisihs, treacle toffee, vanilla and burnt oranges.Very
reminiscent of an aged Ardbeg style.
Taste — Dry palate, woody/balsamic flavours, sweet smoke and Clove oilA distaht fruitihess (prunes/dates), some charcoal and antiseptic hotes.The
aftertaste is long, lingering and typically Ardbeg, with flavours of gentle smoke, briar wood, tar and some sweet, creamy fudge.

"
"6","ISLAY SINGLE MALT
SCOTCH WHISKY

ISS Sample — a.b.v. 56.0%, reduced to 26% for tasting
Aroma — lhtehse and rounded, with notes of ahtiseptic smoke, rubber, smoked ﬁsh and a curious, perfumed hote , |i|<e cassis or violet. Powerful
woody hotes, hints of graphite and some vahilla.This then leads into very earthy/soil notes, a savoury, beefy aroma, and then hints of rum & raisih
flavoured ice cream.
Taste — A very focussed flavour proﬁle, with smoked fruits (prunes, raisihs, sugared plums and cherries), earthy peat smoke, peppermint, ahiseed,
cinnamon and smoked bacon or hickory—smoked hamThe aftertaste is pungent, intense and long, with hints of wood, ahtiseptic lozenges ahd
rubbery smoke.
Conclusions & Next Steps
In summary, we have demonstrated that in micro—gravity terpehes behave differently in this environment compared to those on earth.
This observation alone has implications for not just the malt whisky industry, but those of the food and drinks industry in general. Secondly the
results have proven that in conditions ofmicro—gravity, the pattern of extraction of components of oak wood ihto spirit is different, with a degree of
inhibition observed.This has given rise to the intriguing possibility that a database could be established detailing a‘hormal’ ratio ofwood extractives
covering a range of ages of spirit/whisky, which could then be used for comparison against potentially spurious samples.
The difference in simulated maturation conditions has resulted in a dramatically different flavour proﬁle, which will give rise to the potential
development of new ﬂavours, and in particular hew Ardbeg whisky expressionsThe difference in flavour between the ISS and control samples
is so marked, that further analysis will be carried out to elucidate the creation of the different flavours.
Finally, the experiment described in this paper is very much a ﬁrst step, and further trials on the International Space Station will be considered in
forthcoming discussions with NahoRac|<s.We, at Ardbeg, along with NahoRac|<s, would like to thank NASA and the Space Station Program for
allowing this commercial project to move forward, one which seems to have implications for our industry and no doubt others.

"
