"","x"
"1","@ Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Pergamon ' . @
SCIENCE DIRECT.
WWW“elseVier'°°“‘llocat°/asr » ' doi: 10.1016/80273-1177(03)00395-8
MICROGRAVITY EFFECT ON THE SELF—ORGANIZATION OF
, SILICALITE-l NANOSLABS _
S. Kremerl, E. Theunissen‘, C. E. A. Kirschhock', P. A. Jacobs], J. A. Martens], W. Herfsz,
I Center for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis, K. U. Leuven, KasteelparkArenberg 23, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
' 2 ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk, Netherlands
' ABSTRACT
The effect of microgravity on the kinetics of the formation of Silicalite-l from clear nanoslab suspensions has been
studied. Samples processed on MAXUS4 have been analyzed ex situ and their particle populations have been com-
pared to references obtained under gravity. Microgravity has an unexpected and strong retarding effect on the ag-
gregation of Silicalite-l nanoslabs. © 2003 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. .
INTRODUCTION ‘

Zeolites are low-density crystalline silicates, characterized by their microporous nature. Zeolite channels and
cavities exchange cations and guest molecules with their environment. This property is extensively exploited in
zeolite applications as catalysts, adsorbents and sensors. The ultimate goal then obviously is to design and synthe-
size tailor-made zeolites. Driven by this ambition, fundamental knowledge of the molecular mechanism responsible
for formation of zeolite materials has to be explored.

Bulk zeolite Silicalite-l can be synthesized by aggregation of nanoscopic Silicalite-l particles (nanoslabs) in
suspension (Kirschhock et al., l999a—c, 2001). The synthesis of Silicalite-l nanoslabs is based on the structure
directing effect of the primary template tetrapropylammonium—cation (TPA+) on the silicon source. Due to the al-
kaline nature of the reaction medium the formed nanoslabs are negatively charged and therefore sheathed in a pro-
tective cover of TPA+. Charge and cover prevent further aggregation in this colloidal suspension at room tempera-
ture.

The properties of the surrounding liquid medium determine the size of the nanoslabs in the clear solution. At
elevated temperatures the aggregation barriers can be overcome and the slabs organize into bulk Silicalite-l. This
occurs in a stepwise and organizedmanner due to the strong anisotropy of the aggregating entities (Figure 1).

Microgravity experiments to study the aggregation behavior of nanoslabs have been carried out on MAXUS4.
The objective of this project is the achievement of a full understanding of the involved selfaorganization and ag-
gregation. Previously, the successive aggregation steps of the colloidal particles have been observed to be sensitive

’ to convection. Therefore several microgravity experiments on MAXUS4 under conditions of minimized convec—
tion have been conducted.
Adv. Space Res. Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 259—263, 2003
© 2003 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved
Printed in Great Britain .
0273-1177/33000 + 0.00

"
"2","260 S. Kremer et al.
2 t3 I4 I
t1 t N ac ‘ a y.
N N §Q \Q/ﬁ
“ ‘ Q § t 5 ~ --
§ § 5 § \ z 7 “9 ‘
§ubnan0 Nanoslab Tablet §§5§§55§55
Intermediate \/\§;5§5;
N an 05 § § / / \ /
w Product § § 5 5
» t(1 -3) \ 5 ’
Figure 1: Mechanism of aggregation of Silicalite-l nanoslabs. From left to the right: Subnanos (i.e. half or a quar-
ter of a nanoslab) combine into Nanoslabs with a characteristic time of t1. Nanoslabs. combine into Tablets (i.e. 4
sidewise fused Nanoslabs) with a- characteristic time t2. The Tablets staple into Intennediates (t3). These interme-
diates now assemble into the Bragg crystalline Product Silicalite-l with a characteristic time t4. The ﬁrst three
steps expressed in scattering volumes follow a rate law of ﬁrst order, which can be combined and treated as a ﬁrst
order decay of Names into Intermediates (tl-3). The Product fonnation has previously been obserVed to be auto-
catalytic (ac). I . . ‘
EXPERIMENTAL
Experiment Strategy

Aggregation of Silicalite-l nanoslabs occurs at a noticeable rate only at temperatures above 100°C. Therefore,
clear nanoslab suspensions were pressurized to prevent boiling and heated tothe selected reaction temperatmes.
By quenching the samples at selected times, the particle populations as a function of process time were preserved
to obtain kinetic proﬁles of the formation of Silicalite-l. Each series of samples obtained under microgravity con-
ditions corresponded to a reference series obtained in an identical experimental setup under gravity. ""

Three series of samples were prepared during the MAXUS4 mission. The reference series were obtained later
in a re-assembled experiment module. The following systems were studied:

1) aggregation of conCentrated nanoslab suspension at 155 °C; 2) aggregation of diluted nanoslab suspension at
155 °C; 3) aggregation of diluted nanoslab suspension at 145 °C. ,

The samples (gravity and microgravity experiments) were treated the same way with respect to storage tem-
peratures and times before measurements. However, it turned out that the samples remained stable with time and
did neither change with respect to particle size nor with respect to partiele concentration. This supports our previ-
ous observation that quenched samples can be stored and analyzed at leisure without concern for eVentual‘ageing .
Sample Analysis

To determine the rate constants of the individual aggregation steps the respective particle populations had to
be derived as function of process time. For this X—ray scattering at low angles has been performed in transmissiOn
geometry. The ""liquid samples were sealed in capillaries with outer diameter of 1‘ mm. As X-ray source served a
rotating anode with Cu target. The source was equipped with a parabolic mirror to obtain an intense parallel beam.
The scattered and diffracted X-ray intensity was recorded with a scintillation detector in steps of 0.02° between 0.3
and 50° 29, corresponding to d-values between 380 and 1.7 A. To determine the kinetic paranieters, the scattering
volumes of each particle population had to be determined from the measured scattering curves. Asymmetric peak
functions were selected to describe the known scattering functions of the particles. The areas of the obtained
curves are equivalent to the scattering intensity of the corresponding, particle population, relating to the total scat-
tering volume of the population multiplied with the scattering properties depending on size and shape of the indi-
vidual scattering entity. To obtain the volume fractions of the different populations the deriVed intensities were
normalized considering that the sum of scattering volumes remained constant. The volume fractions as function of
time were ﬁtted with mathematical expressions based on the kinetic model (F igure 1).

"
"3","Microgravity Effect on the Organization of Silicalite-l Nanoslabs 261
RESULTS , . .
Visual inspection of the X-ray scattering curves of gravity and microgravity samples revealed the presence of
distinct particle populations, which vary with the progress of aggregation. This observation is in full agreement
with the aggregation mechanism of Silicalite-lnanoslabs, which obviously remains valid under microgravity con-
ditions. Marked differences in scattering intensity were observed, indicating a strong inﬂuence of gravity on aggre-
gation rate. To quantify this effect on the individual aggregation steps, the X ray scattering curves were analyzed.-
Up to the size of tablets (F igure 1) gravity and microgravity experiments could be ﬁtted with identical sizes of na-
noslabs and tablets. The intermediates, however, grow larger under microgravity conditions. Kinetic parameters
are summarized in Table 1. Due to the dilution with water in series 2 and 3 most of the small entities like Subnanos
and Nanoslabs were converted to tablets already at room temperature. Therefore not all rate constants could be
determined from the available data. Except for the last step, the product formation, the aggregations can be de-
scribed as ﬁrst order processes. The rate of the product formation has been observed to be autocatalytic, depending
not only on the available intermediates but also on the amount of already formed product. The strength of the auto-
catalytic effect is determined by the exponent ac of the product volume in the rate equation. Rate constants k; are
the reciprocal Value of the characteristic times t,- ,listed in Table 1. It is immediately obvious that the reduction of
convection reduces the aggregation rates. This can even better be observed when inspecting the variation of popu-
lations and the ﬁtted reaction curves as function of time (Figures 2 and 3):
ravi _ micro ravl
60 9 W 60 ' 9 ty- Subnanos
Q“ ' '3 ' - Nanoslabs
L. 2.. ' . A Tablets
“ T ‘ - A Nanos
g 40 ‘ GE) 40 . ‘
2 2
>° - . >°
. 20 k - ‘ 20 k ,
o 0 ‘ .
00 . 00 - 00 = 00 1000 00 . 00 . 00 - 00 1000
100 1 00
microgravity
80 80 ‘ Nanos
,_. ._ v Intermediates
a t .3. § 0 Product
:3 60 3 60
5 } g
- 4o - 4o ‘
‘>’ >°
20 20
0 0
200 400 600 800 1000 200 ‘ 00 600 800 1000
tl[s] t [[5]
Figure 2: Volume fractions of the individual particle populations as function of process time of Series 1 under
gravity and microgravity conditions. Symbols represent measured values; continuous lines are the calculated
population evolutions using characteristic times from Table 1. Top: Nanopatticles. (Subnanos, Nanoslab, Tablets)
and their sum (Nanos). Bottom: Volume fractions of Nanos (sum of Subnano, Nanoslab, Tablets), Intermediates,
and large Product particles.

"
"4","262 , S. Kremer et at.
Table 1. Kinetic constants derived from ﬁtting of the volume fractions of the individual particle populations.
———_-lm-n.
mmmmm
Series 1 . .
-
Seﬁesz . . -- -“ y I
------
— ,
Eerie” . . -- -
m_-
DISCUSSION '

Considering the size of the aggregating particles, their dynamics should entirely be dominated by Brownian
motion. Neither ﬂow induced re-orientation nor sedimentation should have any inﬂuence on the local environment
of the nanoslabs. In contradiction to this expectation a strong retarding microgravity effect has been observed. An
explanation can be the existence of larger structures made up from the nanoslabs, which are sensitive to convec~
tion. In those collectives the particles do not readily fuse without an external impact, disturbing the internal organi-
zation. This necessary disturbance could then be convection induced. Following this working model two conditions
have to be met for each individual aggregation:

1) the aggregating species have to be able to approach
2) opposing faces of approaching species have to match .
The ﬁrst step requires sufﬁcient inter-
:E‘ . ference in the system to disturb the nanoslab
—v N l m —-
L' 6 KSubnanos anos ab _:w ::;;::; collectives. It was observed that in all aggre-
LP \ _,_‘""_ series 3 gation processes the characteristic times are
E 5 signiﬁcantly longer under microgravity con-
E \ ditio‘ns (Table 1). This leads to the tentative
g 4 \ conclusion that the approach (1) of the ag-
.,F \ gregating species is the rate limiting step
_._ 0 under microgravity. It has also been ob-
3 INSTEEE Tablets k x . served that the individual rate constants are
“‘Kxxxl '\""';\,\ affected to different degrees. Alignment of
2 Tablets+ Intermediatésxw§lg§ the particles (2) should be related to the
"" available docking areas of each individual
|ntermediates-> Product .

1 . particle type.
03 04 05 06 07 08 0.9 1,0 1,1 With the mttgh assmnpttm‘ that the
' ' ' _' ' _' change of particle orientation is independent

dockln area fraction . . ,. ~

g of 1ts shape, the time a parhcle spendswith a
Figure 3: Ratio of characteristic times in microgravity over speelﬁc face in. one speelﬁc W10“ lspro-
gravity versus docking area fraction. Microgravity slows the portional to thts face area per. overall area.
aggregation steps, depending on the docking area fraction of Therefore, the larger the d°°kttt$ area frac-
the aggregating species. tion, the hlgher IS the probablllty that .the
particle is oriented in a favorable way for
aggregation. This means the retarding ‘eﬂ‘ect

"
"5","Microgravity Effect on the Organization of Silicalitejl Nanoslabs 263
under microgravity should be strongest for the particle with the smallest docking area per overall area found in the
Subnanos. This is indeed what is observed (Figure 3).

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

The unexpected strong inﬂuence of microgravity on the aggregation behavior of Silicalite-l nanoslabs clearly
shows that this system can not be treated like a classical crystallization process. Recognition and self-organization
of the aggregating species playmajor roles in the formation of Silicalite-l from nanoslabs. Further experiments to
clarify the observations and to reﬁne the understanding of this system are called for and will be performed shortly
aboard the 158. In parallel efforts to prove the existence of the postulated nanoslab collectiVes are taken.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS v 7 ‘

This work was sponsored by the Prodex programme of BSA. J.A.M. and P.A.J. acknowledge the Belgian
Government for fmanc‘ial support in the frame of MP-PM networking. C.E.A.K. acknowledges the Flemisch
F.W.O. for a Postdoctoral fellowship. The ESA MAXUS4 mission and the development of the hardware module
'was ﬁnanced in the frame of the ELIPS program.

REFERENCES
Kirschhock, C., R. RaVishankar, F. Verspeurt, et al., Identiﬁcation of Precursor Species in the Formation of MFI
' Zeolite in the TP’AOH-TEOS-HZO System, J. Phys. Chem. B., 103, 4965-4971, 1999a
Kirschhock, C., R. Rdvishankar , L. Van Loovelfen, et a1., Mechanism of T ransfonnation of Preculsors into Nano-
labs in the Early Stages of MFI and MEL Zeolite Formation from TPAOH-TEOS-HZO and TBAOH-TEOS-
,’ H20 Mixtures, J. Phys. Chem. B., 103, 4972-4978, 1999b.
Kirschhoek, C.,’ R. Ravishankar, P. A. J acobs, et a1., Aggregation Mechanism of Nanoslabs with Zeolite MFI Type

Structure,J. Phys. Chem. B., 103, 11021-11027, 19990
Kirschhock, C., V. Buschmahn, S. P. B. Kremer, et a1., Zeosil Nanoslabs: Building Blocks in nPr4B+— Mediated

Synthesis of MFI Zeolite; Angew. Chem. (Int. Edit. ), 40, 2637-2640, 2001.

E-mail address of C. Kirschhock ChristineKirschhock @agr.kuleuven.ac.be
Manuscript received 19 October 2002; revised 10 February 2003; accepted 23 March 2003

"
