"","x"
"1","EFFECTS OF SPACEFLIGHT ON ERITHROPOIESIS: A STUDY ON NEOCYTOLYSIS.
Angela Risso(1’2), Marina Turello (3) and Guglielmo Antonutto (2’4)
(1) Dept. ofBiology , University ofUdine, v. Cotoniﬁcio, 108, 33100 Udine, Italy
(2) MAT1(Micr0gravil)/, Ageing, Training, Immobility) Centre ofExcellence, University of Udine, Italy
(3) Medicina Trasfusionale, A.0.U. “Santa Maria della Misericordia 33100 Udine,1taly
(4) Dept. ofBiomedical Sciences and Biotechnologies, 19.16 M. K01be,4, 33100 Udine, Italy.
e-mail: angela.risso@uniud.it

ABSTRACT that phenotypic changes of young erythrocytes target
Neocytolysis, i.e. destruction of young red blood cells them to destruction.
(RBC), occurs in astronauts over the spaceﬂight ﬁrst
days. Due to microgravity, a central blood pooling 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS.
occurs. The consequent increased diuresis and The present study have been approved by the Ethical
decreased plasma volume cause haematocrit increase. Committees of the University of Udine (Faculty of
Therefore, EPO synthesis is down regulated, a fact that Medicine) and of BSA and have been conducted
associated to neocytolysis, leads to a fast reduction of according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
RBC mass. We have analysed a panel of plasma and Haematological and red cells parameters on blood
RBC parameters which can be related to young red cells samples drawn from four astronauts (a female and three
destruction on blood samples drawn from four males, here named 81, 82, S3, S4, aged 40—60), have
astronauts before and after a 10—11 spaceﬂight days. been assessed before and after a ten days spaceﬂight. In
After the spaceﬂight, ferritin plasma levels were parallel, we have performed a similar analysis on two
increased in three subjects, indicating a possible control subjects (a female and a male, aged 56—60) who
haemolytic process recently occurred. The percentage of did not participate to the spaceﬂight and whose blood
young RBCs was decreased and a small number of samples were drawn according to the same time
those left over exposed phosphatydilserine (PS) on the schedule as the one applied to astronauts. The following
outer membrane layer, thereby showing an “apoptotic— parameters have been investigated, which can be related
like” phenotype, able to trigger ingestion by to RBC destruction, namely: RBC count (cells/nL),
macrophages. A decreased expression of both Hematocrit (Hct, %), Mean Corpuscular Volume
“protective” membrane molecules CD55 and CD47 on (MCV, fL), Reticulocyte count (cell/nL). Plasma
young RBCs was also observed. concentrations of the following factors have been

measured: Transferrin (mg/dL), Iron (ng/dL), Ferritin
1. INTRODUCTION (ng/mL), EPO (mIU/mL), Haptoglobin (mg/dL), total
Whenever environmental conditions require a fast and direct Bilirubin (mg/dL). Furthermore,
change of circulating red cells mass, a physiological subpopulations of RBCs of different age (young,
adaptation occurs, mainly driven by changes in the middle—aged and old) have been separated by
amount of EPO production. For instance, during centrifugation of the blood samples on Percoll® density
acclimatization to high altitude, the adaptation to the gradients(Fig1).
hypoxic condition leads to an increase of red cell mass
(polycythemia), due to increased EPO production. In ”H .7
contrast, upon transition from hypoxic to normoxic :9“
conditions, a fast reduction of red cell mass is obtained (- 43
by a decrease in EPO plasma level and by an associated ”“9? ;
destruction of young RBCs. This process has been —> 1’""
observed in mountain climbers, after return to sea level, i g”
and has been named neocytolysis (lysis of “neocytes”, _> ;
i.e. young erythrocytes) [1—2] .
Neocytolysis occurs also in astronauts and it has been
proposed as a key factor causing space anaemia. ’
Neocytes destruction has been related to the general f,
cardio—vascular adaptation process taking place over the 2:51;:
ﬁrst days of spaceﬂight. Under weightlessness, a fast —>
redistribution of blood, from the lower body to the
thorax, occurs. A diuretic response follows, which
reduces theoplasma volume and 1ncreases haGElatOCI‘lt Fig. 1: Age-related RBCs subsets separated by centrifugation
(Hot). This causes a condition of pseudo on denSity gradient. Very young, young, middle-aged, old
polycythemla”, thereby EPO plasma level decreases, RBCs subsets correspond to the coloured bands Visible from
and a selective lysis of young erythrocytes occurs, so topto bottom.
that RBCs mass is reduced in a few days [3]. It is likely
$6. of the 'Life in Space for Life on Earth SymW/z', Angers, France
22—27 June 2008 (ESA SP-663, December 2008 )

"
"2","91.25i 7 and 964; 2.7 to 86.35i 4.4 and 87 i 8.58,
RBC counts on each subset have been determined, with respectively), and as level of expression (ﬂuorescence
the exception of the very young subset, which included intensity). No signiﬁcant changes were observed in
mainly reticulocyte and was only occasionally control subjects RBC population.
detectable On these subsets we have comparatively
analysed, by means of ﬂow cytometry (Facscan, Becto—
Dickinson, CA, USA) the membrane proteins CD47 4' DISCUSSION
and CD55 and exposure of Phosphatydilserine (PS) on To clear up any doubt on significance of the data on
the outer cellmembrane [2]. blood samples analysed 3—5 days after blood
withdrawal, (due to lag time between blood withdrawal
2, RESULTS. and delivery to the investigators laboratory), we have
made assays on control blood samples at two different
, times: immediately and ﬁve days after blood
After the spaceﬂight, MCV’ MCH’ MCHC’ RBCS withdrawal. With regard to the ranking into age—related
counts and HCT values were not different from those subsets, the erythrocytes phenotype and the
measured before ﬂlght' However, the haematcchemical haematological parameters, no signiﬁcant changes were
analys1s disclosed a mean 28i16 % increase in ferritin observed, with the exception of iron and ﬁxable iron
plasma level in three subjects. AS expected, the plasma level. Then, the before vs after comparison of
percentage Of, recently generated RBCS (young and a astronauts’ blood samples and the variations observed
fraction of middle aged RBCs) was decreased after the can not be accounted for by a random alteration of
ﬂlght (ﬁg. 2)' blood and of its chemical and cellular components
during the transfer time to the laboratory. Furthermore,
to determine erythrocyte Viability after storageoat 4°C,
90 we have loaded w1th calcein—acetoxymethil ester
°\c: :8 (calcein—AM) erythrocytes separated from two healthy
'2 60 blood donors immediately after withdrawal and after a
g 28 fourteen days storage at 4°C. No signiﬁcant difference
0 :8 was observed in the percent of ﬂuorescent red cells after
E 10 storage, as compared with the control population
0 _ (99,59% vs 99,93% and 99,40% vs 98.70%,
young mlddle old respectively).
aged In View of these considerations, the consistency in the
differences observed for some of the haematological
Fig. 2: RBCs counts of age-related subsets. Mean values i parameters and RBC features, prompt us to draw some
SD are reported. conclusions on the data presented above, although the
number of subjects analysed in this study is small.
Moreover, the percentage of middle aged, 01d and, to a Erythrocyte destruction likely occurred during the
greater extent, young RBCs, exposing phosphatydil— spaceﬂight, as suggested by an increase in plasma
serine (PS) 0n the outer membrane leaﬂet was increased ferritin. Hemolysis was likely due to destruction of
(Fig. 3). neocytes, because young erythrocyte counts in blood
samples drawn after the ﬂight were lower than before
the ﬂight. The exposure of PS and the decreased
expression of CD47 in some of the young RBCs support
8 6 this View, indicating that an “apoptotic—like”
m 5 phenotype could trigger ingestion by macrophages.
E :m 5. REFERENCES
m
8- 2 1 Rice L, Ruiz W, Driscoll T, et a1. Neocytolysis 0n descent
2 1 from altitude: a newly recognized mechanism for the control
o\° 0 ofredcellmass.AnnInternMed.V01 134, 652-656, 2001.
young middle old
aged 2 Risso A., Turello M., Biffoni F., Antonutto G. Red blood
cells senescence and neocytolysis in humans after high
altitude acclimatisation. Blood Cells, Molecules and Disease
Fig. 3: % 0f RBCs exposing PS 0n the membrane. Mean V0138’ 83—92’2007'
valuesi SD are reported. 3 Alfrey CP, Udden MM, Leach-Huntoon C, Driscoll T,
Finally the expression 0 f CD55 and CD47 on young ﬂickett MH. Control of red blood cell mass in spaceﬂight. J
, , pplPhyszol. V0181, 98-104, 1996.
RBCs was decreased both as % p0s1t1ve cells (from

"
