"","x"
"1","Perception, 2005, volume 34, pages 545—555
DOI:10.1068/p5358
Two reference frames for visual perception in two gravity
conditions
Mark Lipshits‘ﬂ, Ana Bengoetxea§, Guy Cheron§, Joseph McIntyre#
ﬁlnstitute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia;
§Unité de Recherche de Biomécanique de Mouvement, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium; #Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de I’Action, CNRS—Collége de France,
11 place Maroelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France; e—mail: joe.mointyre@oollege—de—france.fr
Received 5 February 2004, in revised form 20 August 2004
Abstract. The processing and storage of Visual information concerning the orientation of objects
in space is carried out in anisotropic reference frames in which all orientations are not treated
equally. The perceptual anisotropies, and the implicit reference frames that they define, are eVi-
denced by the observation of ‘oblique effects’ in which performance on a given perceptual task
is better for horizontally and vertically oriented stimuli. The question remains how the preferred
horizontal and vertical reference frames are deﬁned. In these experiments cosmonaut subjects
reproduced the remembered orientation of a Visual stimulus in lg (on the ground) and in 0g,
both attached to a chair and while free-ﬂoating within the International Space Station. Results
show that while the remembered orientation of a Visual stimulus may be stored in a multimodal
reference frame that includes gravity, an egocentric reference is sufficient to elicit the oblique effect
when all gravitational and haptic cues are absent.
1 Introduction
The question what reference frame is used to process; store; and interpret Visual
information remains a key topic for studies of spatial perception mechanisms (Appelle
1972; Essoek 1980; Gentaz and Ballaz 2000; Luyat and Gentaz 2002). From experi-
mental evidence showing the so-ealled “oblique effeet’ one can conclude that human
subjects manifest a clear bias toward vertically and horizontally oriented stimuli when
perceiving Visual information. For example; a human observer detects whether a figure
is symmetric more quickly and with fewer errors when the aXis of symmetry is vertical
or horizontal than when it is oriented at an oblique angle (Appelle 1972). The ques-
tion is: what defines the “vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ that are at the source of these effects?

There are at least two possible classes of reference frames that may be used to
define the vertical and horizontal axes for the internal representation of Visual stimuli.
The orientation of the image on the retina coupled with proprioceptive and efferenee-
copy information about eye; neck; and joint angles could be used to store the Visual
orientation in an egocentric reference frame linked to some aXis of the body (eg head;
trunk; eyes). Alternatively; the orientation of the Visual stimulus may be referenced to
allocentrie cues; such as the horizon; vertical and horizontal walls in the Visual scene;
bodily contact with stable elements in the environment; or the perceived aXis of gravity
(Mittelstaedt 1983) or balance (Stoffregen and Riecio 1988). While it has been sug-
gested in a number of studies that gravity can play an important role in defining the
vertical for Visual perception; it is also known that many Visual oblique effects—
ineluding that observed for symmetry detection—ean persist in the absence of gravity
(Leone et al 1995). In the study reported here we continued to explore how proprio-
ceptive and exteroreceptive cues interact to provide the canonical orientations used
for Visual perception.

In our previous studies (Lipshits and McIntyre 1999; McIntyre et al 2001) we
used a matching task in which human subjects aligned an adjustable Visible stimulus
#Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed.

"
"2","546 M Lipshits, A Bengoetxea, G Cheron, J McIntyre
(a line presented on a Video screen) with the remembered orientation of a similar
Visual stimulus presented 1 s earlier. Under normal gravity conditions we showed that
subjects sitting upright produced a clear oblique effect in the performance of this
task: response times were shorter and response variability lower for stimuli with hori-
zontal and vertical orientations than for stimuli presented at other orientations. This
effect was evident even in the absence of Visual cues (subjects Viewed stimuli through
a circular tunnel). Remarkably, however, the preference for horizontal and vertical
stimuli decreased or disappeared when the body aXis was tilted with respect to gravity
(Lipshits and McIntyre 1999). This disappearance was not connected with ocular
counterrolling induced by whole-body tilt, nor could we find a preference of any other
intermediate orientation between the gravity—aligned and body-aligned axes (McIntyre
et al 2001). Note, however, that in similar studies an oblique effect has been found in
subjects who were tilted with respect to gravity, with the preferred aXis of the oblique
effect aligned with the perceived vertical reported by the subject (Luyat and Gentaz
2002). Despite this discrepancy in results (see section 4), both of these observations
argue for a role of allocentric graViceptor information in defining the orientation of a
Visual stimulus, because the perceived vertical aXis is known to result from a weighted
contribution of both graviceptive and proprioceptive information (Mittelstaedt 1983).
On the other hand, the preference for vertical and horizontal axes persisted when
tests were performed in the absence of gravity over the course of a six—month space-
ﬂight (Lipshits and McIntyre 1999; McIntyre et al 2001). We concluded that subjects
normally process Visual orientation information in a multimodal reference frame that
combines both proprioceptive and gravitational cues when both are available, but that an
egocentric reference frame is sufficient for this task in the absence of gravity after a short
period of adaptation.

The experiments described above allow one to exclude gravity as an essential
requirement for what we will call the “Visual alignment oblique effect’, but several
questions remain open about how proprioceptive and graviceptive cues combine to
provide the reference frame used in this task. There are two main possibilities to explain
why cosmonauts continued to produce an oblique effect in the absence of gravity.
In the first, subjects may have used proprioceptive cues to process and store Visual
orientation information exclusively in egocentric terms with respect to the eye, head,
or body axes. In the second, subjects may have relied on tactile receptors and the
stable attachment of the body to the ﬂoor of the space station (in a seated position)
to perceive their body orientation, and hence the orientation of the Visual stimulus,
with respect to the ﬂoor and walls. Furthermore, subjects might also have relied on
Visual memory even in the absence of orienting Visual landmarks. When a participant
gets ready to perform these experiments, he or she sees the walls and the entire
surrounding Visual scene. How long this scene remains in memory is unclear. If the
subject is aware of the fact that body orientation will not change with respect to this
initial View, the remembered Visual scene can serve as a stable reference frame for
orientation estimation. Thus, under the conditions studied so far in the absence of gravity,
alloeentrie information might still have contributed to the perception of Visual orientation
for this task.

The study reported here was conceived to further tease out the possible contribution
of egocentric and allocentric cues for Visual orientation perception. Cosmonauts per-
formed the same experiment as in our previous study, but this time they ﬂoated freely
within the International Space Station (ISS). Under these conditions, subjects had no
contact with the stable reference frame provided by the station nor could they be
assured that the body aXis would remain aligned with respect to the remembered Visual
field. We compared the results of these trials with those performed in an attached
posture in the absence of gravity and with trials performed in a normal 1g environment.

"
"3","Frames of reference for visual perception 547
2 Materials and methods

Subjects looked straight—ahead through a form-fitting face mask. A Video monitor
was centred on the line of gaze at a distance of ~30 cm from the eyes. The monitor was
Viewed through a cylindrical tunnel, thus removing any external Visual references.

Subjects performed a matching task for Visual stimuli (figure 1). Each trial started
with the presentation of a 65 mm stimulus line on the Video monitor that emanated
from the centre along one of seven different directions (—22.50, 00, 22.50, 450, 67.50,
900, or 112.50, where 900 was aligned with the subject’s head aXis, and 00 pointed to the
right). This line was drawn inside a 165-mm diameter circle. Subjects were instructed
to look at and remember the position of this ‘reference’ stimulus. At the push of a
button by the subject, the original stimulus disappeared, and a second line of the same
length but in a different orientation appeared. Using a trackball, the subject rotated
this “variable’ stimulus to the same orientation as the first. By repeated pushes of this
button, the subject had the option of switching back and forth between the reference
and the variable stimuli. To erase afterimages of either stimulus from the retina,
a distractor screen comprised of many crossing lines at different orientations was
presented for 1 s during the transition from one stimulus to the other. The number of
transitions was left up to the subject, but the duration of each trial was limited to 45 s.
When the subjects were satisfied that the two stimuli were identical, they pressed a
second button to indicate the end of one trial and to initiate the next. Each series of
experiments lasted not longer than 20 min and included 42 trials, divided into 3 blocks
of 14 each, with a short rest interval between them.

reference distractor (1 s) response
Figure 1. Three Visual stimuli (black lines) Viewed sequentially by subject through a cylindrical
tunnel. Subjects could move back and forth between the reference and response screens, Via the
distractor screen, by pressing a button. Response stimulus was adjusted by the participant by
turning a potentiometer to match the orientation of the reference stimulus.

On the Earth, subjects performed the experiment while seated upright in front of
the computer. During spaceﬂight they performed the experiment in two conditions.
In the attached position the cosmonauts used belts, foot straps, and a tabletop to
reproduce essentially the same seated posture as that used on the Earth. In the free-
ﬂoating condition subjects held the experimental apparatus (laptop computer and
tunnel) in their hands, with an elastic band used to hold the face against the mask.
An assisting cosmonaut then positioned the subject in the centre of the free working
volume within one of the spacestation modules. The subject was then released and
both subject and apparatus ﬂoated free from any contact with the station. The assist-
ing cosmonaut remained in place to assure that no contact with the walls of the
station occurred. To accomplish this, the assistant applied short tugs on the clothing
of the subject to adjust the position without giving strong directional cues. Very few
such corrections (one to two per session per subject) were required.

"
"4","548 M Lipshits, A Bengoetxea, G Cheron, J McIntyre
Six cosmonauts (five men and one woman) participated in this investigation during
the joint Russian—French ‘Andromeda’ mission (subjects 81—83) and the Russian—
Belgian ‘Odissea’ mission (subjects S4—S6) to the ISS in 2001 and 2002. A11 gave
informed consent prior to starting the experiment and were free to stop the procedure
at any time. Each cosmonaut was tested on the ground before ﬂight, during space
ﬂight aboard the ISS, and on the ground soon after her/his return to the Earth. Details
of the testing schedules for each subject are shown in figure 2. In ﬂight, subjects were
tested on two days over the course of their ten-day space ﬂights, with at least one
day between sessions. Prior to ﬂight, subjects were tested in two pairs of sessions over
the two months prior to the lift-off. Sessions within each pair were separated by at
least one day, corresponding to the testing schedule to be used in ﬂight. Subjects were
tested on three days during the week immediately following the landing, starting on
the day of landing. Three of the subjects were tested two more times two weeks after
returning to the Earth.
’a—pre-ﬂight 1g—,{
L—6o¢ i 2 L—45 2L—30‘ i 2L—is Angionsgdag
MMMM
1 1 1 1 2:13:62
2 FDl % HFDIO/X4—0‘ ¢ R+7 R+15 AngiO—nggda
mm .
“W 11 11 1 1 1 1 1 22155;:
9 free-ﬂoating TA TA T T f T S6
' i.— in-ﬂight 0g _+— post—ﬂight 1g —,{
Figure 2. Testing schedule for cosmonauts who performed the experiment during the Andromeda
and Odissea space ﬂights to the International Space Station. Testing on the Earth before the ﬂight
started as early as sixty days prior to launch (L — 60) and continued up to twenty days after return
to the Earth (R + 20). Subjects performed the experiment at 0g on two different days during a
ten-day mission (FDl — FDIO), in both attached and free-ﬂoating conditions (except 81, who worked
only in free-ﬂoating in-ﬂight).

Aside from the differences in test schedules shown in figure 2, performance of the
experiment by the two different crews (Andromeda and Odissea) differed in two other
respects. First, the response mode differed slightly in the software used for each mission.
For the Andromeda ﬂight, subjects could rotate the response line 3600 or more in
either direction to arrive at the final response position. For example, if the reference
stimulus was presented at 450 and the initial position of the response stimulus was at
1300, subjects could rotate the response either 850 clockwise or 2750 counterclockwise
to reach the reference orientation. This was in contrast to the response conditions
allowed by the Odissea software, and by software used in previously cited studies,
in which movements of the variable response line were limited to a range of —300 to
+1200. In the latter case, subjects could only take the ‘short route’ from the initial
response line orientation to the desired response condition. This difference could have
had an inﬂuence on the time it took to perform each trial (it takes longer to turn the
stimulus 2750 than 850). A second difference was the location in the ISS in which
the experiments were performed. The free-ﬂoating trials were performed in the node
module of the ISS during the Andromeda mission—a large, symmetric volume with
few Visual cues about a locally defined ‘up’ and ‘down’. During the Odissea mission,
free-ﬂoating was performed in the ESO module—a narrower workspace that affords
a more oriented Visual environment. These differences could have played a role in the
Visual memory available to subjects during the trials. Owing to these variations in
conditions, we looked for potential differences between the two missions in the results.

"
"5","Frames of reference for visual perception 549
2.1 Analysis
The sequences of reference-line orientations were quasi-random and each orientation
was shown 6 times. For each trial, we recorded the final orientation of the variable
stimulus when the subject pressed the button to validate her/his response and the time
required to perform the trial from the moment when the reference stimulus first
appeared to the moment when the final response position was recorded by pressing
on the button. We computed the constant error (measured as the average mean error),
the variable error (measured as the standard deviation about the mean for multiple
trials to the same stimulus) and average response time as a function of stimulus
orientation for each subject. To look for effects of stimulus orientation and gravita-
tional conditions on the responses, we used multifactor ANOVA analysis followed by
Sheffé tests for a posteriori analyses. We used primarily a 2 x 4 x 7 factor design with
mission (Andromeda or Odissea) as a between-subjects factor and gravity conditions
(lg pre-ﬂight, 0g free-ﬂoating, 0g attached, or 1g post—ﬂight), and reference-stimulus
orientation (—22.50, 00, 22.50, 450, 67.50, 900, and 112.50) as within-subjects factors.
Owing to operational constraints, subject S1 performed the experiment in only the
free-ﬂoating condition in 0g. The 2><4><7 ANOVA design was therefore applied to
the results of only five subjects (S2—S6). ANOVA tests were repeated on data from
all siX subjects by removing the Og-attached level from the gravity conditions factor,
yielding similar results (not reported here) in terms of the comparison between 0g free-
ﬂoating and lg performance of the experiment.
3 Results
Figure 3 presents the average constant error for subjects S2—S6 in each experimental
condition, and for each of the seven possible reference-stimulus orientations. A negative
error means that the response line was oriented erroneously in the clockwise direction
with respect to the reference stimulus. In all conditions and for all reference angles
subjects worked carefully and demonstrated a high level of attention—average constant
error was less than 1.50 in all cases. As we already saw in our previous investigation,
constant error showed a consistent cyclic pattern across reference-stimulus orientations,
independent of the condition of gravitational and fixation conditions. The pattern was
similar between pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight (attached and free-ﬂoating), and post—ﬂight tests. These
observations were confirmed statistically—the ANOVA analysis revealed a significant
2
--<>-- lg—before ﬂight
—D— Og—free-ﬂoating
—<>— Og—attaehed .;
1 --a:s-- lg—after ﬂight -
x x” t 38 3 . (/9’
E 0 ’3' ‘ :91:""-~o\ \‘A\ y {"" ‘Qg A,"" ,J
E x ’ ~ Qua ,r‘ :1
_1 “d. I ’6'
.6],
—2
OO 450 9O0 OO 450 9O0
Andromeda Odissea
Figure 3. Constant error as a function of gravity conditions and reference-stimulus angle.

"
"6","550 M Lipshits, A Bengoetxea, G Cheron, J McIntyre
main effect of the stimulus orientation factor (F3,6 : 2.77, p < 0.05), but there were no
other significant main effects or cross interactions (p > 0.25). Note, however, that this
pattern of constant error does not constitute the oblique effect observed for this repro-
duction task. In terms of the absolute value of the error, subjects in fact performed
worse for vertical and horizontal reference stimuli. The oblique effect instead manifested
itself in measurements of response time and response variability, as described below.
The response-time data presented in figure 4 indicate that subjects took less time,
on average, to judge that the variable stimulus was aligned with a vertical or horizontal
reference line compared with the time to perform the task for oblique reference lines.
Note that the subjects were not asked to work quickly. On the contrary, they were
advised not to hurry so as to maximise the accuracy of their responses. Subjects
were instructed to switch a minimum of two times between the reference-stimulus and
variable-stimulus presentations and to terminate the trial only when they were sure
that the orientations of both lines were the same. The effect of reference-line orienta-
tion on response time was highly significant (1?ng : 4.72, p < 0.01). Conversely, there
were no differences between different graVitational conditions (neither a significant main
effect of the graVitational conditions factor, nor an interaction effect between stimulus
orientation and graVitational conditions). In a planned comparison to test for the
persistence of the oblique effect in the free-ﬂoating condition, response times for hori-
zontal stimuli differed from those for oblique angles for the critical case of free-ﬂoating
in 0g tested separately (p < 0.05 in all cases). Average response time also appears to
have been less for vertical stimuli than for oblique angles; however, planned compar-
isons between these references did not reach significance at the 0.05 level (p : 007).
Visual inspection suggests that there was a greater range of response times for the
Andromeda crew than for the Odissea crew, with a trend toward lower durations as
time went on, but there was no significant main effect or interaction effect involving
the mission factor. It is unlikely that lower response times observed in-ﬂight for the
Andromeda crew can be specifically attributed to the microgravity conditions of space
ﬂight, even if the effect were statistically significant, because the response times were
even lower after return to the Earth. The difference is more likely due to a learning
eﬂect linked to the choice that subjects could make about whether to turn the response
knob clockwise or counterclockwise for any given stimulus. When this choice was
not available (for the Odissea crew and in our previous experiments) no such overall
25
--0-- lg—before ﬂight
r9 —D— Og—free-ﬂoating
,,-o ,’ —<>— Og—attaehed
20 o‘ ,9"" . nan lg—after ﬂight
{ 15 : 3, 1’\ 3} , , ‘3
Q ~ 0 i. ,A i. ,‘f “a x’” i ’
S “ /,’ 2‘ ,’ ‘5, .f;
D 10 ‘A’
5
0
0O 450 900 0O 450 900
Andromeda Odissea
Figure 4. Response time as a function of gravity conditions and reference stimulus angle.

"
"7","Frames of reference for visual perception 551
effect appeared. More importantly, planned comparisons showed that there were no
statistical differences between the free-ﬂoating and attached conditions of the experiment
for either crew.

Measurements of variable error (response variability for repeated trials to the same
reference orientation) showed a remarkable dependence on the reference-stimulus
orientation for all experimental conditions, as seen in figure 5. On average, variable
error was slightly greater than 10 and showed clear minima for reference stimuli at
00 (horizontal) and 900 (vertical): ie there is a very strong oblique effect in terms of
response variability. This observation was supported by a significant main effect for the
reference-stirnulus orientation factor (F6,18 : 5.49, p < 0.01). There was an unexpected
significant main effect for the gravitational condition factor (F3,9 : 14.69, p < 0.01),
but also a significant interaction between this factor and the mission (F3,9 = 10.18,
p < 0.01). The manifestation of this cross effect is evident in figure 5. Crew members
from the Andromeda mission showed increased variability for the 0g in-ﬂight measures
compared to pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight measures, while results from the Odissea mission
were unaffected by gravitational conditions. A posteriori analysis showed a significant
difference between ground and ﬂight conditions for the Andromeda mission (p < 0.05),
but no difference between the attached and free-ﬂoating conditions in ﬂight. Note,
however, that there was no interaction between the gravitational factor and the stim-
ulus-orientation factor (p > 0.25), ie the overall increased variability shown for the
Andromeda crew at 0g did not change the oblique effect for stimulus orientation.
This is illustrated in figure 6, in which variable errors for each stimulus orientation were
normalised as a function of the average variability across all stimulus orientations
within each session. It appears that the relative preference for vertical and horizontal
stimuli was maintained when free-ﬂoating in 0g whatever the overall level of variability.

--o-- 1g—bef0re ﬂight
3 —o— Og—free-ﬂoating
—<>— Og—attaehed
--A-- lg—after ﬂight
0; 2
""g 5"""", 3 ,5 . ' 3 -
E a‘ '2’. ”0‘23 XI” 01‘ .5 _-~o:l_,_,_a\:““ ,‘O
“3‘5, x“ ,r', «\‘o,’ \V.
o.
0
0O 450 900 0O 450 900
Andromeda Odissea
Figure 5. Variable error as a function of gravity conditions and reference-stimulus angle.

To test the specific hypotheses that the oblique effects were maintained in the
free-ﬂoating condition, we conducted an ANOVA analysis on the variable error for
the free-ﬂoating condition alone, with mission as a between-subjects factor and refer-
ence-stirnulus orientation as a within-subjects factor. We found a significant main effect
of the reference-stimulus orientation on variable error (F6,24 : 3.49, p < 0.05). Planned
comparisons of the vertical and horizontal (computed separately) versus oblique angles
were both significant (p < 0.05).

"
"8","552 M Lipshits, A Bengoetxea, G Cheron, J McIntyre
2
--<>-- lg—before ﬂight
—0— Og—free-ﬂoating
. —<>— Og—attaehed
--a-- lg—after ﬂight
§ . A é .
u: /a- 1 ‘q. ?i/ :0
3‘ A‘ \‘ o 1 X ,’ l,’ 5x g , 0' u g '
a -\ x 5-»? , ,. ’ ,, .
g . ,, y
2! 6’ ’
O
OO 450 9O0 OO 450 9O0
Andromeda Odissea
Figure 6. Normalised variable error (relative to average variability for a given session) as a function
of gravity conditions and reference-stimulus angle.
4 Discussion
In these experiments, we found further evidence for the salience of vertical and
horizontal stimuli in the Visual perception of orientation, both in terms of response
time and response variability in a Visual matching task. Subjects responded more
quickly and more accurately to vertical and horizontal stimuli than to any other
oblique orientation. As in previous studies (Lipshits and McIntyre 1999; McIntyre et a1
2001), we found that gravity is not an essential requirement for the emergence of the
oblique effect. Experiments performed by cosmonaut subjects showed the same pat-
terns of response time and variability as a function of stimulus orientation both on the
ground and during orbital ﬂight. This is in contrast to ground results in which tilting
subjects with respect to gravity eliminated the oblique effect, indicating that, when
present, gravity sensation is nevertheless involved in the perceptual processing.

The current study went a step further by comparing performance of subjects in
free-ﬂoating versus attached conditions at 0g. It is possible to see from Video record-
ings obtained during the execution of these trials that the position of the subject with
respect to the walls changed from trial to trial in the free-ﬂoating state. Subjects had
no tactile information about their body orientation with respect to the local environ-
ment and they could not rely on Visual memory to relate the Visual stimuli to their
surroundings. Indeed, subjects reported that in free ﬂoating they very quickly lost
their sense of orientation. Nevertheless, the oblique effect for the Visual matching of
orientations was maintained in both the attached and free-ﬂoating conditions. The
lack of difference between these conditions shows not only that direct perception of
the direction of gravity is unnecessary to produce the oblique effect but also that a
stable haptic reference frame is not essential. The observed oblique effect is clearly
egocentric at 0g.

In the current study, a specific group of subjects showed an overall increase in
response variability for trials performed at 0g. In contrast to the lower reaction times
observed progressively over the entire mission, measurements of variable error returned
to pre-ﬂight levels during post—ﬂight tests. Thus, the differences in variability cannot
be explained by habituation or loss of attention over the course of the study, nor by a
speed— accuracy trade-off in which lower reaction times cause higher response variability.

"
"9","Frames of reference for visual perception 553
The increased variability at 0g could instead be taken as eVidence for a diminished
ability for some subjects to remember the orientation of Visual stimuli in the absence
of gravity. However; the fact that different crews produced different results in this
respect and the fact that such an overall increase in variability was not observed in
our previous space-ﬂight experiments; suggest that the increased variability for one
crew was probably due to some other uncontrolled factor.

One confounding factor was introduced by the slight difference in the test methods
for the two different missions. Crew members in the Andromeda mission could turn
the knob clockwise or counterclockwise to reach the desired response condition; while
Odissea crew members could only take the shortest route. This may have increased
the task complexity for the Andromeda subjects. Note; however; that this difference in
response method did not significantly affect the response variability on the ground.
If this indeed is the pertinent difference between the two missions; it implies a cross
effect between the gravitational conditions and the task complexity; rather than a
specific effect of task complexity alone. In any case; the more important point is that;
whatever the overall level of variability; the relative advantage of vertical and horizon-
tal stimuli over oblique orientations was maintained; both in free-ﬂoating and when
attached to a stable platform.

In our previous reports (Lipshits and McIntyre 1999; McIntyre et al 2001) we
proposed that under normal ground conditions subjects use a multisensory reference
frame for the internal representation and storage of Visual information. This refer-
ence frame could combine both egocentric and gravitational components. We argued
for this conclusion on the basis of the fact that the oblique effect disappeared for this
task when the subject was tilted with respect to gravity. These results would appear to
be in conﬂict with a more recent study of a similar memorisation and reproduction
task for which the oblique effect was observed with respect to the subjective vertical
aXis reported by the subject (Luyat and Gentaz 2002). While the discrepancy between
these studies remains to be resolved; both argue for an inﬂuence of gravity on the
perception and storage of Visual orientation information. In fact; the subjective vertical
axis; which arises from Visual; vestibular; and proprioceptive cues; can be seen as
another manifestation of the multimodal reference frame used to define orientation
in space. What is clear from the results reported here; however; is that an egocentric
reference frame alone is sufficient when Visual; gravitational; and haptic information
about the external world is unavailable.

The oblique effect has been observed for many different Visual tasks while the
reference frame that defines the horizontal and vertical varies from task to task. Essock
(1980) proposed that oblique effects in Visual perception can be diVided into two
classes; according to the task: Class-I effects concern basic discrimination functions;
these tasks are usually related to the physiological properties of the low-level Visual
system and are thus expressed with respect to a retinotopically defined horizontal and
vertical. Class-II effects involve higher levels of cognitive processing which may be
carried out in a gravitational reference frame; as eVidenced by experiments carried out
by tilting the observer with respect to gravity (Attneave and Olson 1967; Buchanan-
Smith and Heeley 1993; Ferrante et al 1995). These two classes may be considered as
specific cases of the more general dichotomy of egocentric versus allocentric refer-
ence frames. Representing a Visual stimulus in an entirely egocentric reference frame
would facilitate the manipulation of a Visually perceived physical object. One need only
follow the kinematic chain from retina to hand in order to; for instance; reach out
and grasp the object. Knowledge of the orientation of the object or of any body
segment with respect to the external environment would be unnecessary. Alternatively;
when the orientation of an external object must be remembered prior to the inter-
action; one might suppose that the observed entity; which is independent from the

"
"10","554 M Lipshits, A Bengoetxea, G Cheron, J McIntyre
observer’s body, would maintain a stable orientation with respect to the external world.
In this case, an allocentric reference frame would prove beneficial. Interactions between
the object and the observer’s body would therefore depend on the observer’s ‘body scheme’
within the environment, in terms of perceiving the orientation of the body segments
with respect to an externally defined vertical (Pagano and Turvey 1995), perceiving the
orientation of the vertical itself (Mittelstaedt 1983), or in terms of the observer’s own
perceived stable orientation with respect to the world (Stoffregen and Riccio 1988).
The pull of gravity acting on the limbs, on the body, and on the otoliths of the inner
ear most certainly contributes to the observers’ perception of their orientation within
the stable external environment.

Depending on the constraints of the task, it is a reasonable conjecture that the
human perceptual system might use egocentric or allocentric reference frames, or both,
to perceive and store the orientation of Visual stimuli. The coexistence of these two
potential reference frames could, in fact, reconcile the apparently paradoxical observa-
tions found on the Earth and in orbit. When tilted on the Earth, a Visual stimulus
can be aligned with the vertical or horizontal in only one of the two potential reference
frames. Conﬂicting information about the verticality of the stimulus would prevent the
oblique effect from emerging in either reference frame. Conversely, there would be no
conﬂict in the 0g conditions of orbit as great pains were taken to remove all cues
relating to the orientation of the body within the environment. As the allocentric
reference frame was removed, manifestation of the egocentric reference frame would
show through.

One can find other examples in the literature in which human subjects use different
internal reference frames depending on the physical context and the so-called body
scheme. For example, subjects standing on a slowly rotating platform (angular velocity
and acceleration below the vestibular threshold), but with head attached with respect
to the environment, will perceive that the head is turning and the body is fixed
(Gurfinkel and LeVik 1993). In these conditions, subjects will generate reﬂexive eye
movements consistent with the perceived turning of the head in the Earth-fixed reference
frame. When the subject simultaneously touches or grasps a rigid object that is also Earth-
fixed, the cognitive and reﬂex responses are modified dramatically. On touching the
Earth-fixed object with the hand, the subject immediately perceives that the body is
turning while the head is fixed and reﬂexive eye movements diminish accordingly.
Thus, subjects can use haptic cues to establish the physical context of proprioceptive
information coming from the neck and reinterpret this information accordingly. The
interpretation of one set of sensory information depends on the availability of other
sensory cues about the context in which the sensations are to be interpreted.
Acknowledgments. We thank all the participating cosmonauts: Victor Afanasiev, Frank De Winne,
Claudie Haignere, Konstantin KozeeV, Yury Lonchakov, and Sergei Zaletin. We wish to thank
Alain Berthoz for fruitful discussions concerning this study and Didier Chaput, Vladimir GratcheV,
Eric Lorigny, Vadim Shevchenko, Anatoly Shulenin, and Jacques Zilli for their substantial contribu-
tions to this experiment. This work was supported by the French space agency (CNES), the Belgian
Federal Science Policy Office, the Russian Fund for Fundamental Research (grant 02-04-48234)
and the Department of Biological Science, Russian Academy of Sciences program “Integrative
mechanisms of control of functions in living systems”.

References
Appelle S, 1972 “Perception and discrimination as a function of stimulus orientation: The ‘oblique

effect’ in man and animals” Psychological Bulletin 78 266—278
Attneave F, Olson R K, 1967 “Discriminability of stimuli varying in physical or retinal orientation”

Journal of Experimental Psychology 47 323 —328
Buchanan-Smith H M, Heeley D W, 1993 “Anisotropic axes in orientation perception are not

retinotopically mapped” Perception 22 1389 — 1402

"
"11","Frames of reference for visual perception 555

Essock E A, 1980 “The oblique effect of stimulus identification considered With respect to two
classes of oblique effects” Perception 9 37—46

Ferrante D, Gerbino W, Rock I, 1995 “Retinal VS. environmental orientation in the perception
of the right angle” Acta Psychologica 88 25—32

Gentaz E, Ballaz C, 2000 “La perception Visuelle des orientations et l’effet de l’oblique” L’Année
Psychologique 100 715—744

Gurfinkel V S, LeVik Y, 1993 “The suppression of cervico—oeular response by haptokinetic infor-
mation about contact With a rigid immobile object” Experimental Brain Research 95 359—364

Leone G, Lipshits M, McIntyre J, Gurfinkel V, 1995 “Independence of bilateral symmetry detection
from a gravitational reference frame” Spatial Vision 9 127— 137

Lipshits M, McIntyre J, 1999 “Gravity affects the preferred vertical and horizontal in Visual
perception of orientation” NeumReport 10 1085— 1089

Luyat M, Gentaz E, 2002 “Body tilt effect on the reproduction of orientations: Studies on the
Visual oblique effect and subjective orientations” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 28 1002— 1011

McIntyre J, Lipshits M, Zaoui M, Berthoz A, Gurfinkel V, 2001 “Internal reference frames for
representation and storage of Visual information: the role of gravity” Acta Astronautica 49
111 — 121

Mittelstaedt H, 1983 “A new solution to the problem of the subjective vertical” Naturwissenschaﬁen
70 272—281

Pagano C C, Turvey M T, 1995 “The inertia tensor as a basis for the perception of limb orienta-
tion” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 21 1070— 1087

Stoffregen T A, Riccio G E, 1988 “An ecological theory of orientation and the vestibular system”
Psychological Review 95 3— 14

"
"12","p © 2005 a Pion publication

"
"13","ISSN 0301—0066 (print) ISSN 1468—4233 (electronic)
VOLUME 34 9005
www.perceptionweb.com
Conditions Of use. This article may be downloaded from the Perception website for personal research
by members of subscribing organisations. Authors are entitled to distribute their own article (in printed
form or by e—mail) to up to 50 people. This PDF may not be placed on any website (or other online
distribution system) without permission of the publisher.

"
