"","x"
"1","Exp Brain Res
DOI 10.1007/s00221—013—3414—7
RESEARCH ARTICLE

Welghtlessness alters up/down asymmetries 1n the perceptlon

0f self—motlon

Caty De Saedeleer - Manuel Vidal - Mark Lipshits -

Ana Bengoetxea - Ana Maria Cebolla - Alain Berthoz -

Guy Cheron - Joseph McIntyre

Received: 2 October 2012 /Accepted: 9 J anuary 2013

© Springer—Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Abstract In the present study, we investigated the effect exiting each tunnel, subjects were asked to report their per—

Of weightlessness 0n the ability to perceive and remember ception of the turn’s angular magnitude by adjusting, with a

self—motion when passing through Virtual 3D tunnels that trackball, the angular bend in a rod symbolizing the outside

curve in different direction (up, down, left, right). We asked View Of the tunnel. We demonstrate that the strong asymme—

cosmonaut subjects to perform the experiment before, dur— try between downward and upward pitch turns observed on

ing and after long—duration space ﬂight aboard the Interna— Earth showed an immediate and signiﬁcant reduction when

tional Space Station (188), and we manipulated vestibular free—ﬂoating in weightlessness and a delayed reduction

versus haptic cues by having subjects perform the task either when the cosmonauts were ﬁrmly in contact with the ﬂoor

in a rigidly ﬁxed posture with respect to the space station of the station. These effects of weightlessness 0n the early

or during free—ﬂoating, in weightlessness. Subjects were processing stages (vestibular and Optokinetics) that underlie

driven passively at constant speed through the Virtual 3D the perception of self—motion did not stem from a Change in

tunnels containing a single turn in the middle of a linear seg— alertness or any other uncontrolled factor in the 188, as eVi—

ment, either in pitch or in yaw, in increments of 12.50. After denced by the fact that weightlessness had no effect on the
perception of yaw turns. That the effects on the perception

— of pitch may be partially overcome by haptic cues reﬂects

(C3- IC): Saedeleer (E) 'A- BengOCtXCa 'A- M- (36130113 ' the fusion of multisensory cues and tOp—down inﬂuences on

. CI'OII . .

Laboratory of Neurophysiology and Biomechanics of Movement, Vlsual p ercep t10n.

Université Libre de Bruxelles, CP 640, 50 AV F Roosevelt,

Brussels, Belgium Keywords Weightlessness ~Asymmetry - Pitch -

e—mail: caty.de.saede1eer@ulb.ac.be Perception

C. De Saedeleer - G. Cheron

Laboratory of Electrophysiology, Université de Mons, Mons,

Belgium Introduction

M.Vida1 - A. Berthoz - - - -

Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Perception et de l’Action, The ablhty Of humans to perceive and remember self—motron

LPPA UMR7152, CNRS College de France, 11place as they naV1gate through a 2D or 3D enVironment relies

Marcelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France upon the integration of multimodal sensorimotor informa—

. . tion, including static or dynamic Visual cues, propriocep—

M‘ 171p Shlts . . . ti0n, vestibular cues, and corollary discharge (Mittelstaedt

Institute for Information Transm1ss10n Problems, .

Russian Academy of Sciences,B01’sh0iKaretnyiper., 19, 1983,1999; Berthoz 1991, Glasauer and Mlttelstaedt 1998;

127994 Moscow, Russia Vidal and Biilthoff 2009). It is reasonable to assume that
these same sensory cues might contribute to the perception

J‘ MCIntyre Of what the physical environment Offers in terms of potential

Centre d’Etude de la Sensorimotricité, CESEM UMR 8194, . . . . .

Institut Neuroscience et Cognition, CNRS — Université Paris 1110“” aCtlonS (SCluttl Ct 31° 2012)° Addressmg the questlon

Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Peres, 75006 Paris, France Of hOW the CNS integrates Spatial information from multiple

Published online: 09 February 2013 @ Springer

"
"2","Exp Brain Res
sensory cues is fundamental to understanding the workings or are any modiﬁcations to the perception brought about by
of the human brain (Pozzo et al. 1998). the differing affordances and consequences of actions that

In this study, we examined the role of gravitational infor— occur in the unique conditions of weightlessness?”
mation in the perception of self—motion in 3D. We used a
paradigm in which a human subject observed Visual stimuli
corresponding to what they would see as they moved through Methods
a curved tunnel. The tunnel could turn in the horizontal
plane to the right or to the left, or it could bend upward or Figure 1 illustrates the experimental task. Subjects looked
downward in the sagittal plane. The task for the subject was straight ahead through a form—ﬁtting face mask and a cylin—
to indicate the amplitude of the turn, based on the Visual drical barrel frame at the screen of a laptop computer onto
information provided. This task is of interest for the study whiCh the images of Virtual movements were displayed.
of the macroscopic properties of sensorimotor integration The screen was centered on the line of gaze at a distance of
because it requires a succession of processing: (1) temporal ~30 cm from the eyes. The barrel had a diameter of 16.5 cm,
integration of the sensory input (spatial updating) during the yielding a Circular ﬁeld of View subtending 300 in all direC—
transit through the tunnel, (2) working memory related to tions. The form—ﬁtting mask, the barrel, and, if necessary,
the perceived angle, and (3) retrieval (recall) of this angular turning off the lights in the room prevented any external
information.

Previously, such a task revealed a signiﬁcant asymme—
try in pitCh—induced perception on Earth. Downward stimuli
produced a stronger pitch perception than upward, while Upward é?
leftward and rightward yaw turns were perceived equally (b\ Leftward / :""1 $35 Rightward
(Vidal et al. 2006). This up—down asymmetry was also 1 2 \ i 5°C?)
observed when subjects observed a static image of the tun— l i (5/! E
nel (Vidal et al. 2006) and is similar to asymmetrical esti— 2 _) (_
mates of the slope of a hillside Viewed either from above or T T \\7or04
from below (Profﬁtt et al. 1995). To address the question of 0%
what reference frames are used to carry out the task, Vidal A 1 —> <— B
et al. (2006) recorded responses from human subjects who Downward
performed the tasks on Earth in either an upright, seated
posture or while lying on their side. In doing so, the inves—
tigators decoupled the local, egocentric reference frame C D
deﬁned by the subject’s body from the external, Earth—ﬁxed 1
reference frame deﬁned by gravity and somatosensory cues
from the environment. They showed that (l) the up—down
pitch asymmetry could arise in either reference frame, (2)
asymmetries in OKN responses and the orientation with
respect to gravity interacted to determine the response, and
(3) the affordances offered by the Visual scene could also ,_ _ ¢_» )7 2
interact with the sensory cues themselves to determine the /
perceived angle, depending on the orientation of the body - -,: '
with respect to gravity.

In the experiments reported here, we extended this study
by testing the effects of gravity, or lack thereof, on the
perception of the angle of the turn. We asked cosmonaut 3
subj ects to perform the experiment before, during and after
long—duration space ﬂight, and we manipulated vestibular
versus haptiC cues by having subjects perform the task in
weightlessness, either in a rigidly ﬁxed posture with respect
to the space station or during free—ﬂoating. We addressed two Fig. 1 Simulation of passive self—motion inside a tunnel with a bend
speciﬁc questions with these experiments, that is, “Does the in an upward or downwafd .(a—C) Emd 16ftward 0r rightward. (b—d)
lack of gravity or graviceptorinput alter the sensory process— direCtlon' 3’ b ReSponse mdlcator m the form .Of a SChemaﬂC out—
, , , , , Side View of the tube, Viewed from the Side for pitch (a) and from the
lng underlylng the perception 0f self—motion?” and, 1f SO, “IS top for yaw (b); c, (1 entry (1), bend (2), and exit (3) images for turn
it the lack of sensory signal per se that causes the disruption, angle of 25° for pitch (c) and for yaw (d)
@ Springer

"
"3","Exp Brain Res
Visual distractions and removed all external Visual refer— barrel/mask that was placed on a table. During space ﬂight,
ences (Cheron et al. 2006). cosmonauts performed the experiment in two conditions. In
Subjects observed on the laptop screen a Visual ﬂow the attached condition, cosmonauts used belts, foot straps,
corresponding to simulation of passive self—motion inside and a tabletop to maintain a sitting like posture in front of
tunnels in the form of a pipe of constant Circular cross seC— the laptop, like the one used on Earth. In the free—ﬂoating
tion, with stone—textured walls. Each tunnel contained an ini— condition, subjects held the experimental apparatus (laptop
tial linear segment, a single turn in the middle, either in pitch computer and tunnel) in their hands with an elastic band
or in yaw (Fig. l), with one of 6 possible turn angles ranging holding the mask against the face. An assisting cosmonaut
from 25 O to 87.50 in increments of 12.5 0 and a ﬁnal linear then positioned the subject in the center of the free work—
segment. Subjects were driven passively at constant speed ing volume within one of the space station modules. The
through the Virtual 3D tunnel structure. Images were non— subject was released, and both subject and apparatus ﬂoated
stereoscopic but included perspective cues generated by the free from any contact with the station. The assisting cos—
OpenGL graphics libraries. Using a typical subject height monaut ensured that no contact with the walls of the sta—
of 1.75 m as a reference, the Visual ﬂow corresponded to a tion occurred. To accomplish this, the assistant applied short
Virtual speed of 2.21 m/s (around 8 km/h), corresponding tugs on the Clothing of the subject to adjust the position try—
to a fast walking speed for humans. (Additional comments ing to avoid giVing strong directional cues. Very few such
on the realism of the Virtual motion can be found in Vidal corrections (l—2 per session per subject) were required.
et al. 2003). After eXiting each tunnel, subjects were asked Figure 2 shows the testing schedule for the cosmonauts.
to report their perception of the turn’s angular magnitude by Bach cosmonaut was tested on 5 successive periods. Prior to
adjusting a response indicator depicting an outside View of ﬂight, cosmonauts were tested on Earth in 2 pairs of sessions
a tube on the laptop screen that could be bent by manipulat— over the 2 months preceding liftoff (BFl, BF2). The two ses—
ing a trackball. The tube was Viewed from the side for pitch sions within each period were separated by at least 1 day.
turns and from the top for yaw turns (Fig. la, b). The tube These subjects were then tested on 2 days over the course of
was initially presented at 00 (corresponding to a straight tun— their spaceﬂight aboard the 188, with at least 1 day between
nel), and the subjects were instructed to bend the tube to sessions. Additionally, subjects performed the experiment
the perceived turn amplitude by rolling the trackball. They twice on each day of testing on orbit, once in each of the two
pressed a button to indicate when they had reproduced the different experimental conditions (“attached” (A) and “free—
deviation angle corresponding to the angle perceived during ﬂoating” (FF)). The order of passage for the two postural
the simulated movement. After a pause of 5 s, subjects could conditions was counterbalanced across subjects. After their
initiate the subsequent trial with the push of a button. return from 188, cosmonauts were tested on Earth again, on
An experimental session consisted of 48 trials, divided two different days during the week immediately following
into four uninterrupted blocks of 12 trials. A given block the landing (PFl) and two more times 1—3 weeks later (PF2).
included either exclusively pitch turns or exclusively yaw Seven male cosmonauts (Cl—C7) participated in this
turns. All subjects began with a block of pitch turns, and investigation. The mean age (:|:SD) of the cosmonauts was
then alternated, for a block sequence of pitCh—yaw—pitch— 42 :I: 3 years. SiX cosmonauts had preVious experience in
yaw. Each of the 6 possible amplitudes and two possible space ﬂight; one cosmonaut (C2) had no such experience.
directions (leftward and rightward for yaw and upward or All cosmonauts were in excellent health, as regularly deter—
downward for pitch) occurred just once and in a random mined by a special space ﬂight medical commission dur—
order in each block. At the end of a block, feedback about ing all periods of the investigation. SiX out of 7 cosmonauts
the subject’s performance was displayed before a short performed the two sessions within the ﬁrst week of arriV—
pause. This feedback was the error (in degrees) measured ing on orbit (not before ﬂight day 2 and not after ﬂight day
between the real turn angle and the reported response, aver— 7), and the seventh performed the experiment on ﬂight days
aged over all trials in the block. Through this score, subjects 16 and 18. The duration of eXposure to weightlessness var—
were made aware of overall performance but received no ied between subjects; four of whom spent 10 days on orbit
information about what speciﬁc errors were committed. The (Russian—Belgian (ODISSEA) and Russian—Spanish (CER—
experiment was preceded by four practice trials: two trials VANTES) “taXi” missions), while the other 3 cosmonauts
with pitch turns and two trials with yaw turns. During these spent 6 months aboard the ISS (Increments 9, 10, and 11).
trials, subjects learned how to use the computer interface, Ten naive subjects (6 men and 4 women), 34 :I: 8 years
but received no feedback about performance. The full eXper— also participated in this experiment; most were students or
iment lasted approximately 50 min for a complete session, laboratory staff, and all were right handed. These control
which included the instructions and practice trials. subj ects performed experimental sessions on the ground fol—
On Earth, subjects performed the experiment while sit— lowing the same schedule as cosmonauts. All participants
ting on a Chair of adjustable height facing the computer/ gave prior written consent before starting this investigation.
@ Springer

"
"4","Exp Brain Res
Before ﬂight {earth} Space High: [1551 Pnst-m'ghl fearrhl
Period BF1 BF2 PFI PF2
Session,’ _1 20 ~. 1 2 _1 2 1 2 1 2
.f i ‘- ﬁn; day rrmn.
,5 V . ' FF A
. d . —[—|—-)-— FF frEE-aﬂnating
Block 1 1.1 E 2nd 3:“ . .- .- _ _ . A attaChEd
—I—*—'—l—lh .- "" mnnIpr-halanced
Fig. 2 Timeline of testing performed by each cosmonaut. The exper— down) or in yaw (left or right), and the order of trials was the same
iment was performed at different periods: 2 before, 1 during and 2 for each session (pitCh—yaw—pitCh—yaw). On each test day on board the
after ﬂight aboard the ISS. Within each period, subjects were tested 188, subjects performed two sessions, one in an attached posture and
on two separate days, with at least 1 day in between. On each test one in free—ﬂoating. The order of these sessions on board the 188 was
day, subjects performed a total of 48 trials separated into 4 blocks counterbalanced across subjects, with 3 performing attached ﬁrst and
of 12 trials each. Within each block, trials were all in pitch (up or 4 performing free—ﬂoating ﬁrst
Data analysis angles. We tested whether any Changes in perception could
be directly attributed to the lack of gravity by comparing
The perceived turn angle reported by subjects, and the the small—angle up/down asymmetry for either free—ﬂoating
response latencies (corresponding to the time that elapsed or attached with the ground baselines. We also tested for a
between the initial presentation of the response indica— directinﬂuence of gravitational cues versus an indirectinﬂu—
tor and the moment that the subjects pressed the button to ence based on haptic cues by comparing the small—angle up/
record the response) were recorded for each trial (48 trials/ down asymmetry for the attached versus free—ﬂoating pos—
session), distributed over 4 blocks of 12 trials each. We ana— ture on orbit.
lyzed primarily the relative angular error as the difference
between the real angle and the subj ect’s response divided by
the real angle (see Vidal et al. 2006), signed according to the Results
following convention: positive if the reproduced angle was
overestimated (overshot) and negative if it was underesti— Figure 3 illustrates the relative angular error observed for
mated (undershot). the different real turn magnitudes in control subjects and
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures cosmonauts. Control subjects who performed the experi—
was used to test for statistical signiﬁcance of the observed ment on the ground showed a marked asymmetry in the rela—
response errors. First, we applied separate ANOVA to pitch tive angular error for pitch (downward VS. upward) that was
and yaw data for control subjects and for cosmonauts from strongest for small angles and decreased progressively as
their ﬁrst session on the ground, with direction (up VS. down the magnitude of the turn increased (Fig. 3a). A two—factor
for pitch, left VS. right for yaw) and turn magnitude (25 0, ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of turn direction
37.50, 500, 62.50, 750, or 87.50) as within—subject factors. (F1,9 = 47.2,]? < 0.001) and of turn magnitude (F5,45 = 4.03,
Then, based on an observed main effect of turn direction 19 < 0.01) and a signiﬁcant cross effect between these two
for pitch, but not for yaw turns (see Results), and on pre— factors (F145 2 17.8, p < 0.0001). Scheffé’s post hoc analy—
Vious studies (Vidal et al. 2006), we conducted speciﬁc sis showed that the difference between upward and down—
planned comparisons on the computed “up/down asymme— ward response errors was signiﬁcant (p < 0.01) for the
try index” as the average error for pitch downward minus smaller magnitudes (250, 37.5 0, 500), but not for the larger
the average error for pitch upward stimuli, as a function of magnitudes (p > 0.20). We assessed the stability of these
the real turn magnitude and as a function of the experimen— perceptual measures across repeated sessions by comput—
tal session for each subject. Results from pre—ﬂight tests on ing a two—way ANOVA on the up/down asymmetry index
the ground showed that the up/down asymmetry was lim— from the control subjects, with turn magnitude (siX levels)
ited to the smallest stimulus angles (25"", 37.50, 500). We and experiment period (ﬁve levels) as within—subject fac—
therefore deﬁned the “small—angle up/down asymmetry” as tors. We found a signiﬁcant main effect of turn magnitude
the up/down asymmetry index averaged across these three (F 5, 40 = 13.631, p < 0.001), but no main effect of experiment
@ Springer

"
"5","Exp Brain Res
Cosmonauts (n=7)
Controls (n=10) On Earth Free-floating
onboard ISS
1
-O- Downward -O- Downward -O- Downward
h 0-8 Upward Upward Upward
9 ‘k
m 0.6 * *
‘—§ 0.4 at
E”
< 0.2 N
(D
.2
E 0
SE -02
' A B C
-o.4
1
h 0-8 -o- Rightward -o- Rightward -o- Rightward
9 Leftward Leftward Leftward
m 0.6
“—3 0.4
E”
.“2’
E 0 W
35 -02
' D E F
""0'4 25 37.5 50 62.5 75 87.5 25 37.5 50 62.5 75 87.5 25 37.5 50 62.5 75 87.5
Real Turn angle (degrees) Real Turn angle (degrees) Real Turn angle (degrees)
Fig. 3 The relative angular errors of perceived pitch (a—c) and yaw rightward. Values are mean :|: SE. Stars indicate statistically signiﬁ—
(d—f) turns for control subjects (a, d), cosmonauts on Earth before cant (p < 0.05) differences between upward and downward as indi—
ﬂight (b, e), and cosmonauts free—ﬂoating in the ISS (c, f). Gray line, cated by post hoc tests
ﬁlled circle: upward/leftward, Black line, open circle: downward/
period and n0 cross effect. In other words, the pattern of up/ in weightlessness (not shown). A 0ne—way ANOVA com—
down asymmetry was stable over time for control subjects parison across these conditions (before ﬂight, free—ﬂoat—
0n the ground. The same control subjects on the ground ing, attached) for leftward and rightward turns combined;
showed no apparent differences between leftward and right— showed no signiﬁcant effect of these experimental condi—
ward bends (Fig. 3d), with no signiﬁcant main effects or tions on relative angular error (F2, 12 = 0.1024, 19 = 0.90)
interactions between the factors direction (left or right) and even though response latencies were somewhat shorter, 0n
magnitude on relative angular error. average, for the two weightless conditions, compared to
To test for effects of gravity on the perception of self— latencies of trials performed on the ground before ﬂight (F 2,
motion in our Virtual task, we analyzed the responses of 12 = 4.73, p = 0.0305). We can, therefore, conclude that
cosmonaut subjects before, during and after their stay in the cosmonaut’s performance on the perceptual task was not
International Space Station. As a control, we ﬁrst assessed affected by a Change in alertness or any other uncontrolled
whether the conditions of spaceﬂight altered the subjects’ factor during the sessions performed in weightlessness.
perception of the Visual stimuli in a generic fashion, inde— We then looked for a speciﬁc effect of gravity on per—
pendent of a direct or indirect inﬂuence of gravity on the up— ceptual responses to pitch stimuli. Although somewhat less
down asymmetries observed on Earth. We considered the pronounced than for the control subjects, the cosmonauts
perception of horizontal turns as baseline and compared the manifested an up/down asymmetry in their responses on the
performance on these stimuli on Earth before the ﬂight to ground prior to ﬂight (Fig. 3b). A two—way ANOVA applied
weightlessness. As was the case for control subjects on the t0 the cosmonaut’s responses to pitch stimuli 0n the ground
ground, a two—way ANOVA revealed no signiﬁcant effect showed a main effect of turn direction across all siX turn
of turn direction (left vs. right) 0r of turn magnitude (25o, magnitudes that was almost signiﬁcant (F 1, 6 = 5.4680,
37.50, 500, 62.50, 750 or 87.50) for tests performed on the p = 0.05797), and a planned comparison—justiﬁed by our
ground prior to the ﬂight (Fig. 3e) while free—ﬂoating in previous Observations on control subjects—showed that
weightlessness (Fig. 3f) or while in the attached condition cosmonauts manifested a small—angle up/down asymmetry
@ Springer

"
"6","Exp Brain Res
index signiﬁcantly different from zero ([9 < 0.002). While t0 the ﬁrst block of trials performed in each of the periods
free—ﬂoating, the cosmonauts showed a qualitatively smaller performed before and after ﬂight, so that we compared tri—
difference between upward and downward turns (Fig. 3C). als performed with a similar level of practice within each
There was no main effect of turn direction (F 1, 6 = 0.72, period. We considered trials performed in each period on the
p = 0.4267) nor any cross effect (F 5, 30 = 1.51, p = 0.2137) ground and the attached and free—ﬂoating postures 0n orbit
in a two—way ANOVA (direction x magnitude) applied to as separate conditions, resulting in two—factor ANOVA with
pitch data, nor did the small—angle up/down asymmetry siX levels for the factor “condition” (BF1, BF2, A, FF, PF1,
index differ signiﬁcantly from 0 (p = 0.14). Interestingly, PF2) and siX levels for the factor “turn magnitude.” With
the suppression of the up/down asymmetry arose because this analysis, we found the usual main effect of turn magni—
the relative angular error increased for upward turns in tude (F 5, 30 = 3.2028, 19 = 0.01959) 0n the up/down asym—
weightlessness compared to ground, not because the error metry indeX, but we also found a signiﬁcant main effect of
decreased for downward pitch. experiment condition (F 5, 30‘ = 2.7670, 19 = 0.0359) and 110

To provide further statistical support for this Observation, cross effect.
we looked for signiﬁcant Changes in the asymmetry index The main effect of experimental conditions indicates that
across experimental sessions performed on ground and in the lack of gravity could have had an effect on the percep—
weightlessness for the cosmonauts. To look for an imme— tual asymmetry for pitch. This was conﬁrmed by planned
diate effect of gravity on perceptual responses, before any comparisons on the small—angle up/down asymmetry. Fig—
adaptation of task performance to the novel environment, ure 4a shows the corresponding small—angle up/down asym—
we took the ﬁrst block 0ftria1s performed by each subject in metry indeX before, during and after the space mission, for
each of the weightless conditions. We compared these data the ﬁrst block of trials performed in each condition. For
Fig. 4 Small—angle up/down A B
asymmetry index (downward
minus upward for turn angles 0.4 0.4
250, 37.50, and 50"", combined)
for the ﬁrst block (a) and X X
for the last block (b) of each (D (D
. . 'o 0.3 'o 0.3
experimental sess10n.Va1ues are E E
averaged across 7 COSIIIOIIElUIS a a
(mean :1: SE). Stars indicate sta— E 5
tistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) E 0.2 E 0.2
differences from zero (ﬁlled E, E,
stars) or between conditions 8 8
(empty stars) g 0.1 g 0.1
o o
E E I I
s s
0 - 0
N N N N
LL LL LL LL LL LL
0.2 m < a 0.2 m < a
E E E E
m D. m D.
H—J H—j
Ground Inflight Ground Ground Inflight Ground
I
m a \‘ F a
ﬁt- >‘ hi
I_. ‘(g‘@ I_\
'21, I a :7
FF A
%—/
Ground Inflight
@ Springer

"
"7","Exp Brain Res
most conditions, the asymmetry indeX was signiﬁcantly dif— asymmetry disappeared only after a certain amount of time
ferent from zero for the small angles. The one exception is or practice in weightlessness (see “Discussion”).
the trials performed in the free—ﬂoating condition on orbit. Finally, we note that in post—ﬂight testing, the small—angle
The small—angle asymmetry indeX for free—ﬂoating (mean up/down asymmetry indeX was again statistically different
index = —1.76) was not signiﬁcantly different from zero from zero, both for the ﬁrst and for the last block of trials
([9 = 0.81) and was signiﬁcantly reduced (t test, p < 0.025) performed in each test period (or for the ﬁrst and last days
compared to its pre—ﬂight value (mean indeX = 19.68). combined), indicating the up/down asymmetry was restored
Interestingly, in the attached condition, the perceptual on return to ground.
asymmetry for pitch was preserved in weightlessness: the
small—angle up/down asymmetry indeX in this condition
(mean index = 26.96) was signiﬁcantly different from Discussion
zero ([9 = 0.011) and did not differ from values before or
after the ﬂight. We also found that the small—angle up/down In these experiments, we studied how graVitational infor—
asymmetry differed signiﬁcantly between the attached and mation inﬂuences the perception of scene geometry and
free—ﬂoating conditions in weightlessness (p < 0.001). Note the perception of self—motion based on Visual cues. Three
that similar statistical results for all these comparisons were main results emerged from these psychophysical analyses.
obtained whether we considered data from just the ﬁrst (1) The strong asymmetry between downward and upward
block of trials performed during the ﬁrst day of testing in pitch turns observed on Earth showed an immediate and sig—
eaCh condition, or whether we considered all trials (both niﬁcant reduction once in weightlessness in the free—ﬂoating
blocks) performed on the ﬁrst day. condition but not in the attached condition. (2) On the sec—
To test whether practice had any inﬂuence on Changes in ond test day of orbital ﬂight, the perceptual asymmetry was
perceptual asymmetries either on the ground or in weight— also suppressed in the attached condition. (3) These effects
lessness, we then compared the ﬁrst and last blocks of tri— do not stem from a Change in alertness or any other uncon—
als performed within each testing period. Figure 4b shows trolled factor during the ﬂight sessions, as shown by the
the small—angle up/down asymmetry for the second block similar performance observed for yaw turns on ground and
of trials performed on the second day of testing within each in ﬂight. Taken together, these ﬁndings provide evidence for
period, that is, the most—practiced trials performed by each two distinct mechanisms by which graVity (or the absence
subject within each testing period and graVitational condi— of) acts upon the perceptual asymmetry of pitch turns,
tions. On the ground, practice had little or no effect on the depending on whether weightlessness is experienced within
up/down asymmetry, either before or after ﬂight, that is, a stable somatosensory reference frame or not.
we found no statistical differences in the small—angle up/
down asymmetry between the ﬁrst block and last block of Global performance is conserved in weightlessness
trials performed in each pre—ﬂight and post—ﬂight period.
If anything, the average asymmetry index increased from The last of these results is in accordance with previous data
the ﬁrst to the second day of testing in each of these ses— (Vidal et al. 2003) showing that the accuracy to recreate an
sions, although this increase was not statistically signiﬁ— external image of the remembered 3D shape of the tunnel
cant. Similarly, the small—angle up/down asymmetry index was not perturbed in weightlessness. Similarly, the ability
did not Change between the ﬁrst and last block of trials in to reproduce the orientation of a Visual line was preserved
the free—ﬂoating condition on orbit; in neither case was the during the same space missions (Lipshits et al. 2005). These
small—angle up/down asymmetry indeX different from zero. results may at ﬁrst sight seem surprising in the context of
Conversely, the asymmetry diminished with repetition for Visual sensory deﬁcits reported in early Soviet spacecraft
the attached condition in weightlessness. The small—angle mission (decrement in the ability to estimate the direction
up/down asymmetry indeX decreased signiﬁcantly between of line patterns, colors perception, and contrast sensitiVity
the ﬁrst (indeX = 29.6) and last (indeX = 6.0) block of tri— (Popov and Boyko 1967), alterations to the gaze holding
als performed in the attached condition in weightlessness system (Kornilova et al. 1983; Clement et al. 1993), and
(p = 0.013), such that it was no longer signiﬁcantly differ— modiﬁcations to receptor physiology during spaceﬂight
ent from zero ([9 = 0.45) or from the free—ﬂoating condition (Fuglesang et al. 2006). Difﬁculties in reading Check—
(p = 0.83) at the end of the second day of testing. Simi— lists onboard the Shuttle have been reported and analyzed
lar results were obtained when all trials on the second day (NASA’s EDOMP; Clement and Reschke 2008), but except
of testing were compared to all trials from the ﬁrst. Thus, for contrast sensitiVity, no statistically signiﬁcant modiﬁca—
whereas the perceptual asymmetry for pitch was immedi— tions have been found for other parameters such as phoria,
ately diminished in free—ﬂoating and remained low through— eye dominance, ﬂicker fusion frequency, and stereopsis.
out the in—ﬂight period, in the attached condition, the It should be noted, therefore, that our experiments were
@ Springer

"
"8","Exp Brain Res
performed both on Earth and in the 188 in a fully controlled gaze was displaced upward during the early period of ﬂight
Visual ﬁeld, protecting the subject from Changes in Visual (Clement 2003), indicating a possible otolith—dependent
enVironment (solar illumination and absence of atmospheric Change in eye position. This position signal is elaborated by
scattering of light). In these controlled conditions, Visual a complex network of recurrent connections (the oculomo—
perception per se does not appear to be substantially modi— tor neural integrator) performing the mathematical integra—
ﬁed in weightlessness. tion of the different velocity signals coming from vestibular,

optokinetic, and pursuit system (Robinson 1989, Major et
If not retinal physiology, then what? al. 2004). The vestibular—prepositus complex (Cheron et
al. 1986a, b; Cheron and GodauX 1987) and the intersti—
It appears, then, that the processing of Visual information tial nucleus of Cajal (Crawford and Vilis 1993) play a cru—
originating in the retina is not the cause of either the per— Cial role in the gaze holding system. In addition, the OKN
ceptual asymmetry observed on Earth or its disappearance, response is highly sensitive to any type of disturbance of the
given that neither anisotropy in the perception of Visual neural integrator (Cheron et al. 1986b).
orientation (Lipshits et al. 2005) nor basic physiological A Change in the preferred vertical direction of gaze may
function of the retina (Task and Genco 1987) appear to be also eXplain the reversal in vertical vestibulo—ocular reﬂeX
modiﬁed in weightlessness. What mechanisms might, there— (VOR) (Clarke et al. 2000) and in vertical OKN (Clement
fore, underlie our observations that tilt perception is modi— et al. 1986, 1993; Clement 2003) in weightlessness.
ﬁed in space? As in the previous ground studies, both low— Indeed, judgements of slope based on the observation of
level reﬂeX processes and high—level cognitive function may static images also evoke up/down asymmetries of percep—
Come into play. tion (Profﬁtt et al. 1995; Vidal et al. 2006), although not as
strong as in the presence of OKN—inducing Visual ﬂow. In
Eye movements fact, static gaze and OKN are linked, and so it is perhaps not
surprising to see both correlated with the perceptual asym—
In our paradigm, the optokinetic system plays a central role metry. In accordance with Alexander’s Law, the eye veloc—
and may partly eXplain the vertical anisotropy in favor of ity of the slow phase increases when the gaze is displaced
the downward pitch. Indeed, in eXperiments performed on in the direction of the beating phase of the nystagmus and
the ground, suppressing eye movements reduced, but did not decreases with gaze in the opposite direction (LaCkner and
eliminate, the perceptual asymmetry between upward and DiZio 2000). An upward displacement of the OKN beating
downward turns (Vidal et al. 2006). On Earth, the gain of ﬁeld in weightlessness would produce both an increase in
the optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) with slow phases directed the downward slow phase velocity and a decrease in the
upward (corresponding to downward pitch turns in our task) upward slow phase velocity, which would invert the origi—
is larger than those corresponding to the OKN with slow nal up—down asymmetry observed in terrestrial condition.
phases directed downward and may thus contribute to the Another neural network devoted to the velocity storage
asymmetrical perception on Earth (Clement and Reschke mechanism and related to the optokinetic after nystagmus
2008). It is also known that otolith stimulation greatly inﬂu— (OKAN) is assumed by the commissural ﬁbers linked to the
ences the vertical OKN (Igarashi et al. 1987; Clement and vestibular—prepositus complex of both sides (GodauX and
Lathan 1991; Gizzi et al. 1994). Interestingly, it was dem— Cheron 1991). This vestibular network is also known to be
onstrated that the vertical OKN asymmetry recorded in ter— inﬂuenced by gravity (Dai et al. 1991, 1994) and may inﬂu—
restrial conditions was reversed in weightlessness during the ence the perception of up and down.
early period of the ﬂight and showed a trend toward sym— Modiﬁcation to the control of eye position and move—
metry after 2 weeks in weightlessness (Clement et al. 1986, ment in weightlessness provides an attractive hypothesis to
1993; Clement 2003). This vertical OKN reversal might eXplain our eXperimental observations in weightlessness.
eXplain why upward pitch turns became overestimated as The comparison of the attached and free—ﬂoating conditions
much as downward pitch turns, leading to the suppression of on orbit tell us that this is not, however, the whole story. Ves—
the up/down asymmetry in the free—ﬂoating condition. tibular inputs to the CNS were essentially the same in these
In this context, the eye velocity of the OKN slow phase two conditions. Otoliths are unloaded, whatever the orienta—
may be considered as an indicator of the effectiveness of tion of the head in the local enVironment, and any rotations
image motion on the retina not only on the motor action of or linear accelerations of the head in the free—ﬂoating condi—
the eye but also on the ﬁnal perception. The otolith inputs tion were of very low amplitude, below the threshold of the
play a regulating role in the vertical asymmetry by exerting vestibular organs. Yet, the asymmetry differed signiﬁcantly
an upward drive on eye movement (Clement and Reschke between the attached and free—ﬂoating postures on the ﬁrst
2008). It was also reported by the inspection of the posi— day of testing in weightlessness. Vestibular drive to eye
tion of the nystagmus beating ﬁeld that the eye position of movement Circuitry alone cannot, therefore, fully eXplain
@ Springer

"
"9","Exp Brain Res
the differences in Visual perception between ground and 2006). Thus, in free—ﬂoating, up and down are ambiguous,
weightlessness. leading to symmetric overshoot of perceived tunnel angle
for pitch up and pitch down tunnels. Being locally “hori—
Multisensory cognitive context zontal,” one would still eXpect no overshoot and no asym—
metry for left or right yaw with respect to the body aXis. A
We argue instead for a top—down effect of cognitive context, similar, multisensory argument has been applied to eXplain
based on the fusion of multisensory cues as the basis for our illusions of being inverted in weightlessness (Simons and
observations (of. Vidal et al. 2006). Humans are thought to Gardner 1963; Graybiel and Kellogg 1967; LaCkner 1992),
maintain an internal representation of the subj ective vertical anticipation of the effects of gravity on moving obj ects even
(Mittelstaedt 1983, 1999; Berthoz 1991) that results from a when gravity is not in play (McIntyre et al. 2001; Miller et
convergence of otolithiC cues, somatosensory cues (haptic, al. 2008), up/down asymmetries in the perception and inter—
proprioception), and Visual cues about the environment’s ception of moving objects (Senot et al. 2012; Moscatelli and
vertical (trees, walls. . .). Due to the multisensory nature of Lacquaniti2011;Zago et al. 2009; Le SeaC’het al. 2010), and
this mechanism on the one hand, and to the ambiguity of differential tuning of kinematics for upward and downward
otolith and other gravito—inertial signals during motion on arm movements (Le SeaC’h and McIntyre 2007). Tactile
the other, this vertical reference frame is not strictly coupled stimulation has even been proposed as a means to combat
to gravity and may be perturbed during spaceﬂight (Young sensations of spatial disorientation (Van Erp et al. 2006).
et al. 1984; Parker et al. 1985). Therefore, one can imagine It is fascinating to note, therefore, that the asymmetry
that in the absence of gravity, this subjective vertical is built effect disappeared even in the attached posture at some
upon the remaining cues, to the point that a Clear vertical point between the ﬁrst and second time the experiment was
feeling may remain. Indeed, numerous studies have shown performed on orbit. Note that we initially analyzed the ﬁrst
that perceptual anisotropies (Appelle 1972; Lipshits and and last block of trials performed in weightlessness, corre—
Mclntyre 1999; Luyat and Gentaz 2002) rely on a multisen— sponding to the trials performed with the least and the most
sory vertical, rather than on a strict gravitational reference amount of practice in each condition, respectively. We rea—
frame. soned that subj ects might quickly adapt responses to weight—
In our experiments, subj ects could rely on Visual memory less conditions with practice. Nevertheless, the results were
even though external Visual cues were eXCluded from View. the same when we considered together all trials from the
When a participant gets ready to perform these experiments, ﬁrst day of testing in weightlessness; that is, the asymme—
he or she sees the walls and the entire surrounding Visual try indeX was reduced in weightlessness on average in the
scene. If the subject is aware of the fact that body orientation free—ﬂoating condition, but not in the attached condition,
will not Change with respect to this initial View, as on the and this despite the fact that half of the subjects performed
ground or in the attached position on orbit, the remembered the attached condition ﬁrst, and the other half performed the
Visual scene can serve as a stable reference frame for ori— free—ﬂoating condition ﬁrst.
entation estimation. In the free—ﬂoating condition, subjects One might surmise, therefore, that modiﬁcations to
could not, however, be assured that the body aXis would the perception of turn angle required a longer eXposure
remain aligned with respect to the remembered Visual ﬁeld. to weightlessness when in the attached posture, since
The two different conditions used on orbit (attached and responses in the two conditions differed mainly depend—
free—ﬂoating) also differed by the fact that when in a secured ing on the test day. But we could not ﬁnd eVidence that the
seated position subjects could rely on tactile receptors and eXposure time to weightlessness, by itself, was the critical
the stable attachment of the body to the ﬂoor of the space factor; indeed, the one subject who performed the tests rela—
station to perceive their body orientation, and hence the ori— tively late during the ﬂight still showed a large asymmetry
entation of the tunnel’s bend, with respect to the stable plat— for his ﬁrst testing session even after spending 14 days on
form of the ISS. Together with the remembered Visual cues, orbit. Instead, it appears that the asymmetry disappeared
this additional somatosensory information could be enough after a certain amount of practice on the task in the attached
to maintain a strong sense of verticality, preserving in the condition in weightlessness. One possible mechanism for
attached condition of the perceptual asymmetry. Conversely, this effect might stem from the high correlation between
subjects in the free—ﬂoating condition had no contact with haptic and vestibular cues that usually occurs in normal
the stable reference frame provided by the station. In this gravity. According to recent theories, this correlation would
situation, the subject will presumably adopt the body aXis be imbedded in multisensory integration networks, such
as the local vertical and will process pitch and yaw turns that the CNS essentially replaces or reconstructs missing
accordingly in this local reference frame. Nevertheless, taC— gravitational cues with redundant information from other
tile or haptic cues may be critical for the interpretation of sensory signals (Droulez and Darlot 1989; Pouget et al.
ambiguous otolithiC signals, even on Earth (Bortolami et al. 2002; Tagliabue and McIntyre 2011). These associations
@ Springer

"
"10","Exp Brain Res
between sensory signals from different modalities are pre— condition, subjects could substitute stable haptiC cues for
sumably malleable, such that with repeated practice in the actual graviceptor information and perceived downward
absence of up/down vestibular cues, the haptic cues lose sig— versus upward slope accordingly, at least initially. Yaw rota—
niﬁcance, eventually resulting in similar responses between tions, however, are benign in terms of postural stability in
the attached and free—ﬂoating conditions overtime. We can— a normal gravitational ﬁeld and thus should be immune to
not say, however, that the only adaptation is for the haptic this perceptual distortion when the body aXis is aligned with
cues in the attached condition. Although still not signiﬁ— the vertical. Indeed, we saw no asymmetry for yaw stimuli
cantly different from zero, measurements of asymmetry in perceived either on the ground (Fig. 3d, e) or in free—ﬂoating
free—ﬂoating on the second day of testing (Fig. 4b) showed (Fig. 3f), supporting the notion that in the absence of gravi—
more inter—subject variability, the average was somewhat tational or haptic cues, subjects adopt the body aXis as the
higher than on the ﬁrst day (though not signiﬁcantly), and local vertical reference in weightlessness (Le SeaC’h et al.
the asymmetry was no longer signiﬁcantly different from 2010). Yaw stimuli did, however, elicit an up/down asym—
pre—ﬂight values. This suggests that some subjects may have metry both with respect to gravity and with respect to the
adapted toward a return to asymmetric perception of pitch body aXis when subject was lying on their sides (Vidal et al.
turns even during free—ﬂoating, perhaps based on a local ref— 2006). Explaining the asymmetry in terms of affordances in
erence aligned with the body (Miller et al. 2008; Dyde et local versus external reference frames argues, therefore, for
al. 2006; Le SeaC’h et al. 2010). Note that the asymmetry top—down modulation of the low—level sensory signals that
returned immediately on return to Earth, showing that Clear, lead to the perception of slope.
coherent graviceptor cues are sufﬁcient to reinstate the per—
ceptual asymmetry. Still, it is intriguing to observe that our Neural pathways, self—motion perception and
group of cosmonauts, 6 of whom had previous experience in weightlessness
orbital space ﬂight, manifested a lower level of asymmetry
than our control subjects on the ground. The effects of long— The distinction between low—level Circuits and high—level
term exposure to weightlessness might nevertheless have a cognitive function is, in reality, probably not so Clear—Cut
permanent effect on this particular percept. as theoretical discussions of brain function might imply. A

more compelling question is that of where the required mul—
Top—down inﬂuences and affordances tisensory processing is carried out. During self—motion, the

retina is speciﬁcally activated by the optic ﬂow (Angelaki
While the multisensory interpretation may eXplain how the and Hess 2005), and these inputs related to the directional
up/down perceptual asymmetry is modulated by the pres— velocity of the image on the retina are conducted Via the
ence or absence of gravity, it does not provide a direct eXpla— nuclei of the optic tract (NOT) and the nuclei reticular teg—
nation as to why this asymmetry should eXist in the ﬁrst mentum pontis (NRTP) up through the vestibular complex
place. The answer may lie in the analysis of sensory infor— and the cerebellum and then forwarded to the vestibular cor—
mation in the context of what potential actions are afforded tical network where the ﬁnal perception is probably elabo—
by the Visual scene. On Earth, humans have developed the rated (Kahane et al. 2003; Indovina et al. 2005; Maffei et
capacity to stabilize their posture in the anteroposterior and al. 2010). There are thus many loci likely to be affected by
mediolateral directions in order to overcome gravity con— weightlessness.
straints and prevent falling (Redfem et al. 2001; Yu et al. The convergence in the vestibular nuclei of the inputs
2010). For an upright stance and bipedal locomotion, the related to head movement and those related to the moving
risk of falling on any given slope is greater when moving image on the retina may be considered as a ﬁrst reasonable
down versus moving upward. The tendency for human sub— site inﬂuenced by weightlessness. On Earth, if the head is
jects to overestimate downward slopes is, therefore, likely to ﬁxed in space, the output from this neural site is able to pro—
be a manifestation of this perceived danger. The fact that the duce the sensation of a downward pitch only on the basis
overestimation increases for dynamic stimuli, implying that of upward optical ﬂux. But the absence of head movement
the subject is in motion, is coherent with this interpretation. does not mean that the information from the vestibular
But “falling” only has meaning in a normal gravitational afferents is not implicated in the downward pitch sensation.
environment for which there is a stable, Clearly deﬁned up When the head is horizontal, the resting discharge pattern
and down. It is, therefore, possible that subjects confounded of the otolith organs of the inner ear provides a static ref—
“up” and “down” with respect to a body—centered vertical erence; deViations from that baseline are integrated in the
aXis (see above) or perceived an equal danger for upward convergent vestibular network, giving rise to perception of
and downward slopes, in the free—ﬂoating condition, lead— body movement. In weightlessness, the otolith organs are
ing to the symmetric overestimation of pitch angle that unloaded, and the static otolith—spinal and otolith—oculomo—
we observed in both directions (Fig. 3C). In the attached tor inﬂuences are missing. The loss of these anchoring cues
@ Springer

"
"11","Exp Brain Res
might thus explain the alteration in the perception of upward Clément G (2003) A reViGW 0f the Effects Of Space ﬂight 011 the asym-
and downward pitch. metry of vertical optokinetic and vestibulo—ocular reﬂexes. J
Vestib Res 13(4—6):255—263
Clement G, Lathan CE (1991) Effects of static tilt about the roll axis
on horizontal and vertical optokinetic nystagmus and optokinetic
Conclusions after—nystagmus in humans. Exp Brain Res 84(2):335—341
Clement G, Reschke M (2008) Neuroscience in space. Springer, New
. . . . York
Wlth thTS eXpeﬂment’ we demonsmte that the asymmemcfd Clement G, VieVille T, Lestienne F, Berthoz A (1986) Modiﬁcations of
perceptlon 0f upward and downward pl’tCh 13 suppressed 1h gain asymmetry and beating ﬁeld of vertical optokinetic nystag—
weightlessness. However, this perceptual anisotropy is ini— mus in microgravity. Neurosci Lett 63(3):271—274
tially preserved in the “attached” condition and disappeared Clement G, POPOV KE’ Behhoz A (1993) EffeCtS 0f Pedohged weight""
only after practice in weightlessness The reported effects lessness 0.11 b?ma“ horlzontal and vemcal. OptOkmeUC nyStagmuS
. ° . . and optokinetlc after—nystagmus. Exp Bram Res 942456—462
0f weightlessness Oh the early processmg stages (VeShblhar Crawford JD, Vilis T (1993) Modularity and parallel processing in the
and optokinetics) that underlie the perception of self—motion oculomotor integrator. Exp Brain Res 96:443—456
may, therefore, be partially overcome by haptiC cues, reﬂect— Dai MJ, Raphan T, Cohen B (1991) Spatial orientation of the vestihu—
in the fusion 0 f multisensor cues and t0 _d0wn in ﬂuences lar system: dependence of optoklnetlc after—nystagmus on graV1ty.
g . . y p J Neurophys1ol 66(4):1422—1439
0h Vlsual perceptlon, based on the affordances 0f the local Dai M, McGarvie L, Kozlovskaya I, Raphan T, Cohen B (1994) Effects
environment. of spaceﬂight on ocular counterrolling and the spatial orientation
of the vestibular system. Exp Brain Res 102(1):45—56
Acknowledgments This work was funded by the Belgian Federal Droulez J , Darlot C (1989) The geometric andtdynamic implications of
Science Policy Ofﬁce, the European Space Agency (1402004, 118), thencoherence constraints in three d1mens1onal sensorimotor inter—
the Belgian National Fund for Scientiﬁc Research (F.N.R.S.), the aCUOhS‘ In: Jeannerod M (ed) Attention and performance XIH'
Research Fund of the University of Brussels (U.L.B.), Russian research Erlbaum, London, pp 495—526 . . . .
grant RFBR 11-04-01068 and the FI'CIICh space agency CNES (Centre Dyde RT, Jenkln MR, HaI'I:1S LR (2006)Th6 SUbJCCthC Vlsual VCI‘thal
National des Etudes Spatiales). The authors would like to thank the and the percepttial upright. EXP Brain Res ”33612—622 .
cosmonauts Who participated in this experiment, and the personnel at Fuglesang C’ Nah“ L, Picozza P, Sannita WG (2006) Phosphenes 1n
ESA, CNES, Star City, and Tsoup Who made this space experiment lowearth orbit: survey responses from 59 astronauts. AV1at Space
possible, especially D. Chaput, E. Lorigny, and V. GracheV. We thank . BnV1ron Med 77(4)3449_452 . .
P. Demaret and E. Hortmanns for expert technical assistance. GIZZI M, Raphan T, Rudolph 5’ Cohen B (1994) Orlentation Of human
optokinetic nystagmus to gravity: a model—based approach. Exp
Brain Res 99(2):347—360
Glasauer S, Mittelstaedt H (1998) Perception of spatial orientation in
References microgravity. Brain Res Rev 28:185—193
Godaux E, Cheron G (1991) Effects of severance of the vestibular
Angelaki DE, Hess BJ (2005) Self—motion—induced eye movements: commissural pathway on the neural integrator of the oculomotor
effects on Visual acuity and navigation. Nat Rev Neurosci system in the cat. Oculomot Control Cogn Process (Schmid and
6(12):966—976 Zambarbieri eds) 2:39—62
Appelle S (1972) Perception and discrimination as a function of stimu— Graybiel A, Kellogg RS (1967) Inversion illusion in parabolic
lus orientation: the “oblique effect” in man and animals. Psychol ﬂight: its probable dependence on otolith function. Aerosp Med
Bull 78(4):266—278 38(11):1099—1103
Berthoz A (1991) In brain and space, reference frames for the percep— Igarashi M, Himi T, Kulecz WB, Patel S, The role of saccular afferents
tion and control of movement. Oxford University Press, Oxford, in vertical optokinetic nystagmus in primates (1987) A study in
pp 82—111 relation to optokinetic nystagmus in microgravity. Arch Otorhi—
Bortolami SB, Rocca S, Daros S, DiZio P, Lackner JR (2006) nolaryngol 244(3):143—146
Mechanisms of human static spatial orientation. Exp Brain Res Indovina I, Maffei V, Bosco G, Zago M, Macaluso E, Lacquaniti F
173:374—388 (2005) Representation of Visual gravitational motion in the human
Cheron G, Godaux E (1987) Disabling of the oculomotor neural inte— vestibular cortex. Science 308:416—419
grator by microinjections of kainic acid in the prepositus vestibu— Kahane P, Hoffmann D, Minotti L, Berthoz A (2003) Reappraisal
lar nuclear complex of the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 394:267—290 of the human vestibular cortex by cortical electrical stimulation
Cheron G, Godaux E, Laune J —M, Vanderkelen B (19863) Lesions in study. Ann Neurol 54:615—624
the cat prepositus complex: effects on the vestibulo—ocular reﬂex Kornilova LN, Krei’dich IuV, Tarasov IK, Iakovleva 11a (1983) Opto—
and saccades. J Physiol (Lond) 372:75—94 kinetic nystagmus and optokinetic resistance of cosmonauts
Cheron G, Godaux E, Vanderkelen G (1986b) Lesions in the cat in preﬂight and postﬂight periods. Kosm Biol AViakosm Med
prepositus complex: effects on the optokinetic system. J Physiol 17(4):12—15
(Lond) 372:95—1 11 Lackner J R (1992) Sense of body position in parabolic ﬂight. Ann N Y
Cheron G, Leroy A, De Saedeleer C, Bengoetxea A, Lipshits M, Acad Sci 656:329—339
Cebolla A, Servais L, Dan B, Berthoz A, McIntyre J (2006) Effect Lackner J R, DiZio P (2000) Human orientation and movement control
of gravity on human spontaneous 10—Hz electroencephalographic in weightless and artiﬁcial gravity environments. Exp Brain Res
oscillations during the arrest reaction. Brain Res 1121(1):104—1 16 130(1):2—26
Clarke AH, Grigull J , Mueller R, Scherer H (2000) The three—dimen— Le Seac’h AB, McIntyre J (2007) Multimodal reference frame for
sional vestibulo—ocular reﬂex during prolonged microgravity. Exp the planning of vertical arms movements. Neurosci Lett 423:
Brain Res 134(3):322—334 211—215
@ Springer

"
"12","Exp Brain Res
Le Seac’h AB, Senot P, McIntyre J (2010) Egoeentric and allocen— Redfern MS, Yardley L, Bronstein AM (2001) Visual inﬂuences on
tric reference frames for catching a falling object. Exp Brain Res balance. J Anxiety Disord 15(1—2):81—94
201(4):653—662 Robinson DA (1989) Integrating With neurons. Ann ReV Neurosci
Lipshits M, McIntyre J (1999) Gravity affects the preferred vertical 12:33—45
and horizontal in Visual perception of orientation. NeuroReport Sciutti A, Demougeot L, Berret B, Toma S, Sandini G, Papaxanthis
10:1085—1089 C, Pozzo T, Sciutti A, Demougeot L, Berret B, Toma S, Sandini
Lipshits M, Bengoetxea A, Cheron G, McIntyre J (2005) TWO refer— G, Papaxanthis C, Pozzo T (2012) Visual gravity inﬂuences arm
ence frames for Visual perception in two gravity conditions. Per— movement planning. J Neurophysiol 107(12):3433—3445
ception 342545—555 Senot P, Zago M, Le Seac’hA, Zaoui M, Berthoz A, Lacquaniti F, MCI—
Luyat M, Gentaz E (2002) Body tilt effect on the reproduction of ori— ntyre J J (2012) When up is down in 0 g: how gravity sensing affects
entations: studies on the Visual oblique effect and subj ective orien— the timing of interceptive actions. Neurosci 32(6): 1969—1973
tations. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 28:1002—1011 Simons JC, Gardner MS (1963) Weightless man: a survey 0 f sensa—
Maffei V, Macaluso E, IndOVina I, Orban G, Lacquaniti F (2010) Pro— tions and performance While free—ﬂoating. Wright—Patterson Air
cessing of targets in smooth or apparent motion along the vertical in Force Base OH; (USAF Tech. Rep. AMRL—TDR—62—1 14)
the human brain: an MRI study. J Neurophysiol 103(1):360—370 Tagliabue M, McIntyre J (2011) Necessity is the mother of invention:
Major G, Baker R, Aksay E, Seung HS, Tank DW (2004) Plasticity reconstructing missing sensory information in multiple, concur—
and tuning of the time course of analog persistent ﬁring in a neural rent reference frames for eye—hand coordination. J Neurosci
integrator. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(20):7745—7750 31:1397—1409
McIntyre J , Zago M, Berthoz A, Lacquaniti FR (2001) Does the brain Task HL, Geneo LV (1987) Effects of short—term space ﬂight on seV—
model Newton’s laws? Nat Neurosci 4:693—694 eral Visual functions. In: Bungo MW, Bagian TM, Bowman MA,
Miller WL, Maffei V, Bosco G, Iosa M, Zago M, Macaluso E, Lac— Levitan BM (eds) Results of the bye sciences DSOs conducted
quaniti F (2008) Vestibular nuclei and cerebellum put Visual gravi— aboard the space shuttle 1981—1986. NASA Technical Memoran—
tational motion in context. J Neurophysiol 99(4):1969—1982 dum 58280, p 173
Mittelstaedt H (1983) A new solution to the problem of the subjective Van Erp JB, Groen EL, Bos J E, van Veen HA (2006) A tactile cockpit
vertical. Naturwissenschaften 70:272—281 instrument supports the control of self—motion during spatial diso—
Mittelstaedt H (1999) The role of the otoliths in perception of the verti— rientation. Hum Factors 48(2):219—228
cal and in path integration. Ann NYAcad Sci 871:334—344 Vidal M, Bulthoff HE (2009) Storing upright turns: how Visual and
Moscatelli A, Lacquaniti F (2011) The weight of time: gravitational vestibular cues interact during the encoding and recalling process.
force enhances discrimination of Visual motion duration. J Vis Exp Brain Res 200(1):37—49
11(4):5, 1—17 Vidal M, Lipshits M, McIntyre J , Berthoz A (2003) Gravity and spatial
NASA’s Extended Duration Orbiter Medical Project (EDOMP), Final orientation in Virtual 3D—mazes. J Vestib Res 13:273—286
Report, 1989—1995, NASNSP—1999—534 Vidal M, Amorim MA, McIntyre J , Berthoz A (2006) The perception
Parker DE, Resehke MF, Arrott AP, Homiek JL, Liehtenberg BK of visually presented yaw and pitch turns: assessing the contri—
(1985) Otolith tilt—translation reinterpretation following pro— bution of motion, static, and cognitive cues. Percept Psychophys
longed weightlessness: implications for preﬂight training. AViat 68:1338—1350
Space Environ Med 56(6):601—606 Young LR, Oman CM, Watt DG, Money KE, Liehtenberg BK (1984)
POpOV V, Boyko N (1967) Vision in space travel. Aviatsiya i Kosmo— Spatial orientation in weightlessness and readaptation t0 earth’s
naut 3:73—76 gravity. Science 225(4658):205—208
Pouget A, Deneve S, Duhamel JR (2002) A computational perspective Yu Y, Yank JR, Katsumata Y, Villard S, Kennedy RS, Stoffregen TA
0n the neural basis of multisensory spatial representations. Nat (2010)Visua1 Vigilance performance and standing posture at sea.
Rev Neurosci 3:741—747 AViat Space Environ Med 81(4):375—3 82
Pozzo T, Papaxanthis C, Stapley P, Berthoz A (1998) The sensorimo— Zago M, McIntyre J , Senot P, Lacquaniti F (2009) Visuo—motor coordi—
tor and cognitive integration of gravity. Brain Res Brain Res Rev nation and internal models for object interception. Exp Brain Res
28(1—2):92—101 192(4):571—604
Profﬁtt DR, Bhalla M, Gossweiler R, Midgett J (1995) Perceiving geo—
graphical slant. Psychon Bull ReV 2:409—428
@ Springer

"
