"","x"
"1",". . . _ .
grgggafiggggnf:ﬁgcﬁdéugust 2012, 46(8). 1029 1043 I n f o r m a
ISSN 1071-5762 print/ISSN 1029-2470 online healthcare _
DOI: 10.3109/10715762.2012.698012
ORIGINAL ARTICLE .
. Roles of mitochondria-generated reactive oxygen species on X-ray-induced .
apoptosis in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, HLE
Hiroko P. Indol, Osamu Inanamiz, Tomoko Koumura3, Shigeaki Suenagal, Hsiu-Chuan Yen“, Shizuko Kakinuma5,
Ken-Ichiro Matsumotos, Ikuo NakanishiS, William St Clair6, Daret K. St C1air7, Hirofumi Matsuis, Richard Cometteg, 1
Oleg Gusev9, Takashi Okuda9, Yasuhito Nakagawa3, Toshihiko Ozawa10 & Hideyuki J . Majimal’ill ;
1Department of Oncology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan, 2Laboratory of ‘
Radiation Biology, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan, 3School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, t
Kitasato University, Laboratory of Hygienic Chemistry, Tokyo, Japan, 4School of Medical Technology, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan,
I Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, 5National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan, 6Department of Radiation Medicine, College of Medicine, .
C11 Chandler Medical Center, Lexington, KY, USA, 7Graduate Center of Toxicology and Markey Cancer Center; University of Kentucky
I College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky, USA, 8Division of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
L University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, 9Anhydrobiosis Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 0hwashi, ‘
} Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, 10Department of Health Pharmacy, Yokohama College of Pharmacy, Totsuka, Japan, and 11Department of Space .
Environmental Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan
I
' Abstract -
HLE, a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line was transiently transfected with normal human MnSOD and MnSOD without a mitochon-
drial targeting signal (MTS). Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), lipid peroxidation and apoptosis were examined as a function of
i time following 18.8 Gy X-ray irradiation. Our results showed that the level of mitochondrial ROS increased and reached a maximum level
. 2 hours after X-ray irradiation. Authentic MnSOD, but not MnSOD lacking MTS, protected against mitochondrial ROS, lipid peroxidation
' and apoptosis. In addition, the levels of mitochondrial ROS were consistently found to always correlate with the levels of authentic MnSOD }
. in mitochondria. These results suggest that only when MnSOD is located in mitochondria is it efﬁcient in protecting against cellular injuries
by X-ray irradiation and that mitochondria are the critical sites of X-ray-induced cellular oxidative injuries. I
Keywords: X-rays, mitochondria, ROS, apoptosis, MnSOD
I.
. Introduction
(MTS)). This targeting signal encompasses an oligopep-
’ Ionizing radiation has been shown to generate reactive tide consisting of 24 amino acids [7]. The gene is tran-
' oxygen species (ROS) in a variety of cell types [1—3]. scribed in the nucleus, translated in the cytosol and
1 These products can peroxidise membrane lipids and attack transported into the mitochondria, where the precursor
proteins and DNA [4]. However, the most reactive ROS is cleaved and the protein undergoes maturation [8,9].
‘ in biological systems are hydroxyl radicals with a rate con- The localization of MnSOD in mitochondria is depen-
stant (kobs) of 1.1><1010 M“1 s‘1 and an estimated decay dent on the presence of the signal peptide. However, it
' time of nanoseconds to microseconds [4,5]. is unclear whether the enzyme has antioxidative and anti- !
i We previously demonstrated for the ﬁrst time that the apoptotic functions against X—ray irradiation when it is
production of mitochondrial ROS and intracellular present in the cytosol.
J 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) is an important mechanism In this study, we examined the role of mitochondria- .
by which radiation causes cellular death, which suggests localised MnSOD in the prevention of radiation-induced
' that the removal of superoxide radicals by manganese oxidative injury by transient transfection of the MnSOD
. superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in the mitochondria is a gene, using the human hepatocellular carcinoma derived ‘
. critical step in the prevention of radiation-induced cell cell line HLE. To elucidate the signiﬁcance of mitochon-
death [4,6]. These ﬁndings suggest that ROS are gener— drial localization, MnSOD without MTS gene was tested
ated from mitochondria after but not during irradiation using transient transfection in the same cell system. We ‘
and that the primary source of ROS is a superoxide that examined mitochondrial ROS levels when MnSOD was .
‘ is scavenged by MnSOD. MnSOD has a leader sequence absent or present in mitochondria and evaluated the role
. to target mitochondria (mitochondrial targeting signal of protection.
] _____________________
' Correspondence: Hideyuki J. Majima, DDS, PhD, Department of Oncology and DepaItment of Space Environmental Medicine, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Tel: +81—99-275-6270; Fax: +81-99-275-6278.
. E-mail: hmajima@dent.kagoshima-u.ac.jp ‘
(Received date: 24 May 2012; Accepted date: 24 May 2012; Published online: 22 June 2012)
' Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code

"
"2","1030 H. P. Indo et (11.
Materials and methods excited at 488 nm and the emission was ﬁltered using a
double-window barrier ﬁlter, of which the ranges Were '
‘ Cell lines 510—590 nm and 580—620 nm.
1
Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HLE [10] was X-ray irradiation
‘ purchased from the Health Science Research Resources
1 Bank of the Japan Health Sciences Foundation, Osaka, Each dish was irradiatEd to a dose of 18.8 Gy at room
I Japan. The pCR3.1-Uni plasmid (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, temperature using an X-ray unit (MBR-1505R; Hitachi,
CA) containing a sense human MnSOD cDNA insert, of Hitachi, Japan). The machine was operated at 120 kVp and
which the MnSOD sequences were identical to the data- 4.2 mA with a ﬁlter of 0.5 mm Al. The dose rate was 1.3
base (KEGG, locus link ID: 6648; http://www.genome.jp/ Gy/rnin at a focus surface distance of 30 cm.
dbget-bin/www_bget?hsa+6648). HLE cells were trans-
‘ fected using the GenePORTER transfection procedure In vitro protein synthesis by Rapid Translation
1 (Gene Therapy Systems, San Diego, CA) according to the System RTS 500
‘ manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, cells were plated 24
‘ hours before transfection at 60% conﬂuence in a 60-mm MnSOD and MTS lacking MnSOD proteins were synthe-
dish. The cells were transiently transfected with 5 pg of sised by Rapid Translation System RTS 500 instrument \
pCR3.1-Uni plasmid containing a sense human MnSOD and Rapid Translation System RTS 500 E.coli Circular .
L and MnSOD lacking MTS [MTS(—)] cDNA insert, in Template Kit (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim,
serum-free Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium (DMEM) Germany) in vitro. MnSOD or MTS lacking MnSOD
(Life Technologies, Inc., Grand Island, NY). The controls insert was cloned into pIVEX 2.3 vector with NdeI and ‘
-, were transfected with pCR3.1-Uni plasmid without the ,_Xma[ site. These MnSOD sequences were identical to ‘
7 human MnSOD cDNA insert. Twenty-four hours after those in the database (KEGG, locus link ID: 6648 httpzll
transfection, the medium was changed to DMEM contain- www.genome.jp/dbget-bin/www_bget?hsa+6648). In vitro
ing 10% foetal bovine serum (JRH Biosciences, Lenexa, protein synthesis was performed according to the manu- ‘
KS), and after another 24 hours, cells were treated with facturer’s instructions (Roche). Brieﬂy, 15 pg of plasmid
trypsin and plated to dishes for use in all experiments. were mixed with 750 pl of Reaction Mix and 50 pl of
To identify the localization of MnSOD and MnSOD Energy Mix. The reaction was performed at 30°C, 120
[MTS(—)], HLE cells were also transfected with pEGFP rpm for 24 h. The amount of synthesised protein was esti-
expression plasmid with the MnSOD or the MTS(-) mated by BCA protein Assay Kit (PIERCE, Rockford, IL,
genes, which encodes the entire open reading frames of USA) and the MnSOD activity of the proteins produced
the genes, and also the mitochondria targeting-peptide was examined by SOD activity gel assay.
alone (MTS alone). To construct pEGFP expression plas-
mid, the cDNAs were excised with Eco RI and Hind HI SYBR green-based Real-time quantitative PCR
from the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products and
inserted into the pEGFP-N 1 expression vector (Clontech, Total RNA was isolated using ISOGEN from cultured
San Diego, CA). The construct was transformed into an cells transfected with pCR3.1 vector alone, or pCR 3.1
XLl Blue Competent cell line (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), vector containing MnSOD sequence or pCR3.1 vector
and puriﬁed with a QIAFilter Plasmid Midi Kit containing MnSOD lacking mitochondria targeting signal
(QIAGEN, Valencia, CA). The product was then trans- [MTS(-)] sequence. All cDNAs were prepared by reverse
fected into cells using the Gene Porter 2 system (Gene transcription of 1 mg total RNA using oligo dT(20) primer
Therapy System, San Diego, CA), using the same method (0.4 mM/50 ml ﬁnal volume) and ReverTraAce (Toyobo
described in the pCR3.1-Uni plasmid transfection proce- Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan). An equivalent volume of 0.1 ml _
dure. The transfected cells were visualised by a CSUlO of cDNA solution was used for quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc
confocal laser scanning unit (Yokogawa Electric Corp., cDNA by real time quantitative RT-PCR. Primer sequences
Tokyo, J apan) coupled to an 1X90 inverted microscope were compared with the available human genome and EST
with an UPlanAPO 60x objective lens (Olympus Optical database (http://b1ast.genome.jp/) to select primers that
Co., Tokyo, J apan) and a C5810—01 color chilled 3CCD gave a single ampliﬁcation product. Real time quantitative
camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu, J apan). The (RT-PCR) reactions were performed on the ABI prism
cells were excited at 488 nm and the emission was ﬁltered 7000 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems.
using a 515-nm barrier ﬁlter. To ascertain the location of Foster City, CA, USA) using QuantiTect SYBR Green
the mitochondria, the cells were stained with MitoTracker PCR Kit (QIAGEN, Maryland, CA). The PCR conditions
Red CMXRos dye (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Tokyo, were as follows: denaturing at 95°C for 15 seconds, anneal' .
J apan) and then visualised using a confocal laser scanning ing and elongation conditions at 60°C for 1 minute X 40,
microscope excited at 488 nm, while the emission was followed by 50°C for 2 minute and 95°C for 15 secondS- . '
ﬁltered using a 580-nm barrier ﬁlter. A merged double The ampliﬁcation of a single size product was further
image of green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) and MitoTracker veriﬁed by gel electrophoresis. Assays were performed in I '
Red was taken using a confocal laser scanning microscope 3 X triplicate. All data were normalised to an internal |
Material ma be rotected b co: riht law Title 17, U.S. Code

"
"3","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1031
standard (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; one and the relative MnSOD activities of other cells were
GAPDH). calculated. The mean of the integrated density obtained
Primers to amplify human MnSOD and GAPDH were from the ﬁve independent ﬁles was used as a representa-
as follows: tive value for the experiment. l
thSOD'F: SI'TI‘CTGGACAAACCTCAGCC Relative levels of mitochondrial ROS !
CTAAC GGT—3' ~ '
thSOD’R: SI'AACAGATGCAGCCGTCAGC 2-[6-(4’-Hydroxy)phenoxy-3H-xanthen-3-on-9-yl]benzoic
TTCTCCTTAAA'T acid (HPF; Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, J apan),
hGAPDH'F: SI'GGGCAAGGTCATCCCTGAG which is a newly synthesised ﬂuorescent dye for selective
CTGAA'T detection of hydroxyl radical ('OH), a highly reactive oxy-
hGAPDH’F‘ 5""TCTAGACGGCAGGTCAGGT gen species (hROS), was developed by our group [12] and
CCACC'3 used in this study. The dynamic range of ﬂuorescence aug-
mentation should be wide, because both molar absorption 1
W651” n “01 analysis Of MnSOD and quantum efﬁciency values are greatly increased upon '
O—deacylation. Although HPF alone barely ﬂuoresced, HPF
"" Protein concentration was measured With BCA protein selectively and dose-dependently afforded a strongly ﬂuo-
assay reagent (Pierce, ROCk-‘fOfd, 1L)- Equal amounts 0f PYO‘ rescent compound, ﬂuorescein, upon reaction with hROS,
tein (20 ug/lane) from each sample were fractionated on a but not other ROS. Glass-bottom (35 -mm) dishes (MatTek
15% SDS-PAGE gel and electrophoretically transferred to Corp., Ashland, MA) with monolayers were prepared for
nitrocellulose membranes. The membrane was incubated staining with HPF. During irradiation and 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 1
With primary anti-MnSOD antibody (rabbit polyclonal 6t_hours after 18.8 Gy X—ray irradiation, the cell culture
. ahtibody, 13500, JBC1939954 Millipore, Temecula, CA) medium was replaced with a modiﬁed Hanks’ balanced salt I
‘1 overnight at 4°C. Immunoblotting was performed using solution (HBSS) containing 10.0 mM HEPES, 1.0 mM
1 horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody MgClz, 1.0 mM CaClZ and 8.3 mM glucose adjusted to pH '
1 (goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP, 302004 Santa Cruz Biotecfh- 7.3 : 0.05. The cells were then loaded with 10 M I-IPF and
J 1101ng, Santa Cruz, CA)- Detection was .performed Wlth incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C. Bio-images of HPF were I
(1 hydrogen peroxide and 3,3’-d1armnoben21d1ne/4HC1 (DAB; taken using a CSU-lO confocal laser scanning unit
1 Wako Pure Chemicals, Osaka, Japan).1mages were obtained (Yokogawa Electric Co., Tokyo, Japan) coupled to an 1X90 I
' and the bands of MnSOD were quantiﬁed by the Alphalm— inverted microscope with a UPlanAPO 20 x objective lens -
I ager® imaging system (Alpha Innotech Corp., 3311 Leandro, (Olympus Optical Co., T okyo, Japan) and a C5810-01 color
CA). The mean of the integrated density obtained from the chilled 3CCD camera (Hamamatsu Photonics). I-[PF was
ﬁve independent experimental results was used as a repre— excited at 488 nm and the emission was ﬁltered using a
l sentative value for the eXperiment- 515—nm barrier ﬁlter. The intensity of the laser beam, the
exposure time of the 3CCD camera and the gain of the
' SOD activity gel assay ampliﬁer were held at 500 pW, 1.0 s and 18 dB, respec-
l tively, to allow ﬂuorescence quantitative comparisons of the
1' A non-denatured gel assay for SOD activity was performed relative ﬂuorescence intensity of the cells between groups.
1 according to the method described [11] with slight modi- Cells were chosen and scanned at more than three spots for
ﬁcations. Cells were sonicated in 50 mM potassium analysis on a random basis. The values of the average ﬂuo-
. phosphate buffer (pH 7.8) and 20 pg protein/lane was elec- rescence intensity/cell were obtained using IPLab Spectrum
'1‘ trophoresed through a non-dissociating riboﬂavin gel con- version 3.0 software (Scanalystics Inc., Fairfax, VA) with
sisting of a 5% stacking gel (pH 6.8) and a 12% running some modiﬁcation of the program by the author (H.J.M.).
gel (pH 8.8) at 4°C. To visualise the SOD activity, the f
gels were ﬁrst incubated in 2.43 mM nitro blue Electron spin resonance spectroscopy ‘
tetrazolium (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, l
J apan) in deionised water for 20 minutes and then in Electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR) spectroscopy '
56 nM riboﬂavin (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, detection was performed as described previously [13]. ‘
Ltd., Osaka, J apan) with 28 mM N,N,N’,N’- Brieﬂy, mitochondria with or without irradiation were iso-
Tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) (Sigma Chemical lated using a Mitochondria Isolation Kit (Pierce Biotech-
Co., St. Louis, MO) in a 50 mM potassium phosphate nology,Inc., Rockford, IL) and mixed with5 mMrespiratory '
buffer (pH 7.8) for 15 minutes in dark. Gels were then substrates (succinate, glutamate and malate), 0.5 mM
washed in deionised water and illuminated under ﬂuores- NADH, 0.2% digitonin and 10 mM 5-(2,2-dimethyl-l,
cent light until clear zones of SOD activity were evident. 3-propoxycyclophosphoryl)—5-methyl-l-pyrroline Nvoxide
Images were obtained and the bands of MnSOD were (CYPMPO, Radical Research Inc., Tokyo, Japan).
quantiﬁed by the AlphaImager® Imaging system (Alpha Digitonin was added to the reaction mixture for permeation ‘
Innotech Corp., San Leandro, CA). MnSOD activity was of NADH into the mitochondrial membrane. The concen-
measured by reading the band intensity. The MnSOD ’ tration of proteins in the ﬁnal reaction mixture was 250 ug/
' activity of the vector—transfected cells was normalised to ml evaluated according to the method described by the
' Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code .1

"
"4","1 1032 H. P. Indo et al.
I manufacturer (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The microscopic ﬁelds were taken using a C5810-01 color Chilled '
reaction mixture was immediately transferred to a quartz 3CCD camera (Hamamatsu Photonics). More than 300 cells
1 ﬂat cell (RST-DVTOS; 50 mm X 4.7 mm X 0.3 mm, Rad- per culture dish were counted and counts were made in three I
l ical Research Inc., Tokyo, J apan) with a temperature con- separate cultures per irradiation. Analyses were perform¢d
troller (ES- DVT4, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, J apan). The ESR without knowledge of the irradiation history of the culture
I spectra were recorded by using a J EOL-RE X-band spec- dishes, by random examinations. The percentage of apoptoﬁc i
1 trometer (JEOL Ltd.) with a cylindrical TEOll mode cavity cells (ap0ptosis frequency) in each culture dish Was
‘ (JEOL Ltd.). All ESR spectra were obtained at 37°C under determined.
‘ the following conditions: 10 mW incident microwave power, I
100 kHz modulation frequency, 0.1 mT ﬁeld modulation Separation of cardiolipin from cells and quantitative
‘ amplitude and 15 mT scan range. Analysis of the hyperﬁne determination ofphospholipid hydroperoxides following
splitting constants (Hfsc) and spectral computer simulation X-ray irradiation
were performed using a Win-Rad Radical Analyzer System
(Radical Research Inc.). Total lipids from HLE cells were separated into indj- ‘
vidual phospholipids by Thin-Layer Chromatography ' i
Immunoﬂuorescent staining for HNE (TLC) developed with chloroformzmethanolzacetic acid 1
(65:25:13, v/v/v). Spots of cardiolipin (CL) were scraped ..7\
Glass-bottom (35-mm) dishes (MatTek Corp., Ashland, off the TLC plate and extracted by methanol. An aliquot '1
MA) with monolayers were prepared for immunoﬂuores- of extracted CL was used for determination of amounts 7‘
cence staining with a monoclonal antibody directed against of phospholipids hydroperoxides [15] using diphenyl-
proteins modiﬁed with the major membrane lipid peroxida- l-pyrenylphosphine (DPPP; Wako). Determination of j
Vtion product HNE. This monoclonal antibody (N OF Corp., amounts of phospholipid hydroperoxide was based on the .
Tokyo, J apan), speciﬁc to HNE—modiﬁed proteins, was value of ﬂuorescence intensity obtained from the standard 1
raised by immunizmg mice with an HNE-modiﬁed keyhole phospholipid hydroperoxide and normalised to pmole of ?
limpet hemocyanin (HNE-KLH) conjugate [14]. The anti- the phospholipid hydroperoxide. I
body was tested for cross—reactivity towards glutaraldehyde, 1
formaldehyde, l-hexanal, 2—hexanal, 4-hydroxy-2—hexanal CL hydroperoxide detection by DPPP '{
and 2—nonenal. Enzyme-linked irnmunosorbent assays with i
these potential competitors were performed. The results One hundred micrograms of CL (Sigma) was dried on the ‘
indicate that the anti-HNE antibody is highly Speciﬁc to slide glass, and covered by 200 pl PBS, and exposed to 18.8 ‘
HNE-derived modiﬁcations to protein. Two hours after irra— Gy. PBS was removed and dried, and 10 ul of chloroform '3
diation, cells were ﬁxed with 4% formaldehyde/PBS at was added and recovered and transferred into a vial. Then,
room temperature for 30 minutes, rinsed twice with PBS chloroform was added to 1 ml of whole volume. After dry-
and membranes were permeabilised by incubation in 95% ing off the liquid, lipid hydroperoxides were dissolved in 0.1 w '
ethanol with 5% acetic acid for 10 minutes. After washing ml of chloroform and methanol (2: 1, v/v) containing 0.03% ‘
with PBS twice, cells were incubated for 30 minutes in a of butylhydroxytoluene, and DPPP dissolved in chloroform ‘ I
blocking serum (1% bovine serum albumin in PBS) and for and methanol (1:1, v/v) was added to the incubation mixture ‘
1 hour at room temperature in anti-HNE mouse monoclonal at a ﬁnal concentration of 0.1 mM. The reaction mixture was '
antibody at a dilution of 1:200. The cells were rinsed twice incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C in dark and was placed on
with 1% bovine serum albumin in PBS and reincubated ice after the reaction. The ﬂuorescence of DPPP oxide was
with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) conju- monitored at 352/3 80 nm after the addition of methanol.
gate (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) for 1 hour at room
temperature in dark. Image acquisition and analysis were Statistical analysis '
similar to that of HPF, except that the exposure time of the .
3CCD camera was 4 seconds. Statistical analysis was performed by an analysis of vari'
ance (ANOVA), followed by Scheffe’s F tests. A p value .
Microscopic assessment of nuclear chromatin of less than 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.
condensation and fragmentation . Data were presented as the mean -_|- SD. or S.E. Calcula-
tions were performed with Excel, on a Power Macintosh _
Cells grown on glass-bottorn (35-mm) dishes (MatTek Corp.) G4 (Apple Computer, Inc., Cupertino, CA).
were stained with the ﬂuorescent dye Hoechst 33342 (Molec-
ular Probes). Seventy-two hours after irradiation, the cells
were ﬁxed for 30 minutes in a solution containing 4% form- Results .
aldehyde in PBS and then incubated in PBS with 1 mg/ml of I E
the dye for 30 minutes. The cells were washed twice with Localization of MnSOD, MnSOD lacking M TS f;
PBS and ﬂuorescence was visualised using an D(90 inverted and MTS signal only in HLE cells I- i
microscope with a UPlanAPO 20 X objective lens (Olympus , I 1:
Optical Co.). The dye was excited at 340 nm and emission ' The cDNA ' was linked with the pEGFP vector and then. I
was ﬁltered with a 510-nm barrier ﬁlter. Photographs of transfected into HLE cells (Figure 1) to examine the *5
Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code ’ ' ‘

"
"5","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1033
locations of MnSOD, MnSOD [MTS(— )] and MTS alone. normalised to 1 and the relative MnSOD activities of other
The same cells were stained with MitoTracker Red cells were calculated. The activity of MnSOD was 1.00 :
CMXRos to locate the mitochondria. We merged the 0.17 in vector-transfected cells, 1.75 i 0.15 in MnSOD-
images of GFP and MitoTracker to verify the coexistence transfected cells and 1.25 2': 0-31 in MTS(—)—transfected -
of MnSOD, MnSOD [MTS(—)], or MTS alone in the cells. The activity of CuZnSOD did not differ between ..
mitochondria. MnSOD was localised to the mitochondria, Vector-, MnSOD- and MTS(-)-transfected cells (Figure
as shown by the yellow colouring (green plus red) in the 2C). Interestingly, MnSOD with and without MTS pro-
merged image of pEGFP and MitoTracker (Figure l). teins, which were synthesised by Rapid Translation Sys-
Similarly, the merged image of MTS alone clearly shows tem in vitro, showed that both of them have SOD activity
yellow colouring. However, only a few yellow regions can (Figure 2D); however, the activity of MTS(— )-transfected
be seen in the merged image of MTS(—)-transfected cell cells was signiﬁcantly lower than that of MnSOD cells.
showing that most of it was localised in the cytosol,
although the ﬂuorescence intensity of pEGFP in the image Evidence of intracellular mitochondrial generation of
is unclear or obscured in the cytosol. ROSfollowing ionizing radiation and subsequent
apoptosis
Expression and activity of MnSOD in vector alone,
, MnSOD and M TS-lacking MnSOD transfectants The mechanisms of apoptosis have been well studied, and
; two major pathways, namely, the FAS and mitochondrial
, i The production of active MnSOD in these transfectants pathways [16,17] have been discovered. However, whether , '
. ‘ was investigated in cell lysates. The parent HLE cells were any ROS besides hydroxyl radicals generated during ion-
’ 1” transiently transfected with the vector (Vector), MnSOD iZing irradiation contribute to apoptosis has not been
: . gene (MnSOD) and MTS-lacking MnSOD gene [MTS(—)]. investigated. To address this question, we performed a «
. m ’ Expression of MnSOD mRN A was measured by real-time series of experiments to examine the relationships between
_-' RT-PCR analysis and expression of MnSOD protein was intracellular ROS, lipid peroxidation and subsequent
‘ detected by Western blot analysis. The mRNA and protein apoptosis.
levels of MnSOD in MnSOD-transfected cells were sig- A ﬂuorescence probe, HPF, a dye sensitive to 'OH that
niﬁcantly higher than those in vector-transfected cells detects intracellular ROS generation, has been developed ‘
l (p < 0.01). There was also a signiﬁcant difference between to selectively detect 'OH and peroxynitrites ([12]). The
: "" MnSOD- and MTS(—)-transfected cells (Figures 2A and dye was loaded during irradiation and images were taken
L B). MnSOD activity was detected by the SOD activity gel at 0 and 30 minutes, and 1-, 2-, 4- and 6-hour incubation ‘
L .I assay and was examined by reading the band intensity. The times at 37°C (Figures 3A and B). 'OH produced by ion— '
. ‘I‘I MnSOD activity of the vector-transfected cells was izing radiation should disappearinnano— to micro-seconds
. r
l
. i MnSOD/ pEGFP MTS(-)IpEGFP MTS aloneIpEGFP 1
L
L pEGFP - -
L .
Mite - - -
Tracker
. Red
. pEGF: . .w
l Mito , ‘f
Tracker ; ‘
Red ' . .
Figure 1. Localization of MnSOD, MTS(—) MnSOD and MTS alone using pEGFP vector in HLE cells. Localization of full-length MnSOD
[MnSOD/pEGFP], MnSOD lacking MTS [MTS (-)/pEGFP] and MTS signal alone [MTS alone/pEGFP]. GFP was visualised using the
pEGFP transfection system. The same HLE cells were stained with MitoTracker Red CMXRos to locate the mitochondria. Images of GFP
and Mito’I‘racker were merged to identify MnSOD in mitochondria. MnSOD was localised to the mitochondria, as shown by the yellow
colouring (green plus red) in the merged image. A similar image was taken for MTS alone [MTS alone/pEGFP] where yellow colouring is
clearly visible in the merged image. However, only a few yellow regions can be seen in the merged image for MTS lacking MnSOD [MTS
l ' (-)/pEGFP], indicating that most of it was located in the cytosol, although the ﬂuorescence intensity of pEGFP is unclear or obscure in
’ cytosol in the picture.
’ ‘ Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code

"
"6","I 1034 H. P. Indo et a1.
‘ (A) MnSOD gene expression (3) MnSOD protein expression I
‘ Mean i so |_L_| Vector MnSOD MTS(-)
I 8 , - . ., . . . MnSOD
6 A 200 ** *1: m ‘— protein
a .——..—ﬁ .
I 26% 150 ~~~ ‘— ﬂ-actin I
(D ‘ |
| Q) \
l E, 8 100 Mean 1 SD I
30:) 50 2.0 .. ,.
. 3, 2 r: I H l
‘ g V 0 E c 1.5 |
1 0: Vector MnSOD MTS (-) e .9
1 °- 8
. Q 9 1.0
0 a
‘2 w 0.5
2
1 0.0
Vector MnSOD MTS (-)
1
‘ (C) Transfected cells (D) Roche
1 _ Vector MnSOD MTS(-) MnSOD MTS(-)
MnSOD MnSOD
aCtMty -ACtiVity
1 CuZnSOD
‘ activity
mmww.’ {M , ‘— B’actin
1 Mean: SD Mean :1: SD
.3” 1H: * g 1'5
é 2'5 I———H—_I 2?; 1 3
O .
m 2.0 g
“’ .2 1.1
3% 1.5 E
. E 9 0.9
O 1.0 D
‘ 8 0.5 8 0-7
c C
2 0.0 2 0.5
Vector MnSOD MTS(-) MnSOD MTS(-)
Figure 2. MnSOD expression and activity examination. (A), Expression of MnSOD mRNA measured by real-time RT-PCR analysis. The
mRN A levels of MnSOD in MnSOD-transfected cells were signiﬁcantly higher than those in vector-transfected cells (p < 0.01). There were
signiﬁcant differences between vector-, MnSOD- and MTS(-)-transfected cells (p < 0.01). (B), Expression of MnSOD protein was detected
by Western blot analysis. The protein levels of MnSOD in MnSOD-transfected cells signiﬁcantly increased compared with vector-transfected
cells (p<0.01). There were signiﬁcant differences between vector-, MnSOD- and MTS(-)-transfected cells (p<0.01). (C), A native _'
polyacrylamide gel was stained for SOD activity in vector alone, MnSOD and MnSOD MTS(-)vectors [MTS(—)] transfected in HLE. Each I
lane was loaded with 20 mg of protein and electrophoresed through a 12% polyacrylamide gel at 4°C. While the activity of MnSOD in the I
control plasmid transfectants (Vector) and MTS(—) plasmid transfectants was low, activity in the MnSOD-transfected cells was clearly
detectable. The activity of CuZnSOD and the amount of beta-actin detected by Western blot did not differ among the three cell types. I
MnSOD transfected cells showed over 1.75 i 0.15 times more MnSOD activity compared with that of intact vector alone control cells .:
(1.00 :1: 0.17). MTS(—) MnSOD also showed greater activity (1.23 -_t- 0.31). Bar: mean :t S.D.; Scheffe’s F test. *: P< 0.05; **: P <0.01- I
(D), Translation proceeded in a non-cellular translation system (Roche) in vitro and MnSOD activity was tested to examine whether prodlICtS
of MnSOD and MTS(-) cDNA have superoxide scavenging functions. The results showed that both MnSOD and MTS(—) cDNA have I
SOD activity. |
[4]. In the present study, ﬂuorescence intensity increased the mitochondrial area. To ascertain that the observed -
during irradiation compared with no irradiation (Control), ﬂuorescence represented ROS generation from rmtochon~
and surprisingly, the intensity further increased and dria, cells were stained with HPF and IVIitoTraclcerRiO?1
reached a maximum 2 hours after irradiation, followed by CMXRos and the resulting images were merged (Figh‘e'
decreasing intensity (Figure 3B). Notably, an increase in 4). The images Showed that the intracellular locatlons of
ﬂuorescence intensity was detectable just after irradiation. HPF (green) and MitoTracker Red (red) ﬂuorescence 31""
In addition, the laser confocal images showed that punctu— consistent. with each other, shown by yellow colouring .
ated ﬂuorescence was observed around the nuclei in every' (green plus red) in the merged images, suggestlng that
picture, suggesting intracellular ROS are generated from ROS were generated from mitochondria.
Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code "" t -

"
"7","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1035
(A) X-ray (18.86y) irradiation
Control Simultaneously Immediately 30min after
% after irradiation after irradiation irradiation
‘ 1hr after irradiation 2hrs after irradiation 4hrs after irradiation 6hrs after irradiation
t ROS Detection (HPF) '
l (B) **
t '_—_L
** [é
I—g——
|____**'._—_l
7 l———§?—I
‘ r——!r—|
'——nv———ﬁ n
40 F—“——_1 ** r—1
l—**——1l—Y—1
\ 35 .—.'_""‘—_‘ r———'
. g 30
I 8
‘ :5 25
\ § 20
<19 '
e 15
w 3
\ .
(>0 05x¢ §¢ $$¢ 0&0 $30 3‘00 3%?
as one «so 04$) ms 6% e49 c°k>°
\ C) $0 8‘0 06 8Q “3 8’0 N 8% q, 80 V 8% b 8’0
0“ é” «$3 é"" «4’ e” e” e”
e§ ‘ v} e} e? a a a
r}? q? q? q? q? q?
Figure 3. Mitochondrial ROS generation following 18.8 Gy irradiation. The generation of mitochondrial ROS following 18.8 Gy irradiation
was investigated as a function of post-treatment time. The amount of intracellular ROS was detected by means of a ﬂuorescent probe, HPF,
which selectively detects hydroxyl radicals, using a confocal laser microscope. Hydroxyl radicals produced by ionizing radiation should
disappear in nano- to micro-seconds. During irradiation, immediately after irradiation, and 0, 0.5, l, 2, 4 and 6 hour after irradiation, the
cell culture medium was replaced with a modiﬁed Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS). The cells were then loaded with 10 M HPF for
incubation of 15 minutes at 37°C. Intracellular ROS generated during irradiation were detected and surprisingly the levels increased as a
function of time following irradiation. During irradiation, the ﬂuorescence intensity increased compared with no irradiation (Control). The
intensity further increased, reaching a maximum level at 2 hours after irradiation before decreasing. In addition, each laser confocal image
showed ﬂuorescence around the nuclei, indicating that intracellular R08 is generated in the mitochondrial area. A: HPF ﬂuorescent images
during irradiation, immediately after irradiation (0) 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6 hours after irradiation. B: Fluorescence intensity obtained from the
representative HPF images shown in A. Over 100 cells were counted for ﬂuorescence intensity. Bar: mean i S.D.; *: P < 0.05, **: P < 0.01;
Scheffe’s F test.
Electron spin resonance spectroscopy as shown in Figure 5. Here, the open inverted triangle
positions represent the signals that originated from
By using CYPMPO, which has advantages for the stability hydroxyl radicals, and the close inverted angle positions
of spin adducts and detection sensitivity as a spin-trapping represent the signals originating from superoxide anions.
reagent, we detected NADH/succinate-dependent 02"" ‘ Compared with the control at 2 and 4 hours (Figures 5A
production in mitochondria treated with 0.2% digitonin, and C), overlapped signals of superoxide and hydroxyl
Material ma be rotected b co ri ht law Title 17, US. Code i

"
"8","m% Hﬂmwad y
ROS in mitochondria. In addition, the changes in ROS in _.'>
the MTS(—) cells following irradiation were Similar to .'
those in the control vector cells, indicating that MnSOD
lacking MTS had no effect on irradiation-induced mito- ll
I “PF chondrial ROS levels. ’3'
X-ray irradiation induces lipid peroxidation h'
l The levels of HNE-modiﬁed proteins were evaluated by ‘I
1 immunohistochemical staining to determine whether l
7 changes in mitochondrial ROS generation are accompa- ‘
nied by an increase in lipid peroxidation products (Figure I)
‘ MitoTracker R e d 6.B).. Prehmmary experiments showed that there were no ‘
1 Signiﬁcant changes in HNE-modiﬂed protein staining ‘ ‘
. intensity among all cell types using non-irradiated cells ’
[ (data not shown). The changes in the HNE-modiﬁed pro- 1
‘ tein staining intensity in vector-transfected non-irradiated H
I control (Control) and irradiated vector-transfected (Vec- ~
\ . tor), MnSOD-transfected (MnSOD) and MTS-lacking 1
MnSOD-transfected [MTS(-)] cells obtained 2 hours ‘
HPF+ 2‘ after irradiation at 37°C are shown in Figure 6B. The M
f MitoTracker Red results show that the HNE—rnodlﬁed protein staining inten- I
sity was suppressed in the MnSOD cells, but not in the “
Vector or MTS(—) cells. These results indicate that ’
authentic MnSOD but not MnSOD lacking MTS sup- )r
presses the levels of X-ray irradiation—induced formation (
Figure 4. Mitochondria generate mostintracellular ROS.To ascertain of intracellular HNE—modiﬁed proteins. I
that the observed ﬂuorescence represented ROS generation from .
mitochondria,HLE cells were stained with HPF and also MitoTracker - ~ - -
Red CMXRos dye. Pictures were taken and the merged images of Eﬁect 0f MnSOD on X-ray Irradlatzon-mduced ‘ X
HPF and MitoTracker Red are shown. The results clearly indicate ap 0p tot 1C cell death '
that the intracellular locations of HPF (green) and MitoTracker Red
(red) ﬂuorescence are consistent with each other, as shown in the To determine the effect of irradiation on apoptotic cell
merged image as yellow (green PluS red) death, we performed a microscopic assessment of nuclear l‘ , .
chromatin condensation and fragmentation assay using w ‘I
Hoechst 33342 staining (Figure 6C). Apoptosis frequency il l
radicals were seen at 2 and 4 hours following 18.8 Gy was determined in cells cultured for 3 days after irradia- I
irradiation (Figures 5B and D), and the signals disap- tion in an incubator at 37°C. The results show that i .
peared on the addition of CuZnSOD (Figure SE) to iso— apoptosis frequency was suppressed in full-length I
lated mitochondria. These results conﬁrmed the results of MnSOD—transfected cells compared with Vector and r'
increasing HPF levels after X—ray irradiation (Figure 3B), MTS(—) transfectants, although all cells [Vector, MnSOD I l
although the intensity further increased and reached a and MTS(-)] revealed a signiﬁcant increase in apoptosis v ‘
maximum 2 hours after irradiation before decreasing as frequency compared with non-irradiated control (Control) ‘
observed using HPF confocal microscopy. cells. This result indicates that MnSOD can suppress \
X—ray irradiation-induced apoptosis only when it is local- r
MnSOD but not MnSOD [MTS( - )] suppresses ised in the mitochondria.
irradiated mitochondrial ROS 1
Correlation between mitochondrial ROS (HPF), “
A dye sensitive to 'OH, HPF was used to determine the intracellular lipid peroxidation (HNE) and apoptosis ‘
effect of MnSOD on X-ray irradiation-induced mitochon- (Hoechst) .
drial ROS generation. Experiments were performed to I
observe the generation of intracellular ROS at maximum To better understand the relationship between mitochon- x i
levels, speciﬁcally 2 hours after irradiation (Figure 6A). The drial ROS, nitrogen oxide substances, intracellular lipid r
dyes were loaded 2 hours after irradiation and the images peroxidation and cell death, we constructed scattergrams
were acquired after 15 minutes of incubation at 37 °C. and performed linear regression analysis of A, the relative .
Changes in ﬂuorescence intensity are shown for ROS (Fig- apoptotic index against the relative ROS staining intensity
ure 6A). The results show that the ﬂuorescence intensity of (r2 = 1.00; Figure 7A); B, the relative apoptotic index
HPF was reduced in MnSOD-transfected cells compared to against the relative HNE modiﬁed protein-staining inten-
l Vector— and MTS(-)—transfected cells, indicating that ‘ sity (r2 = 1.00; Figure 7B); and C, the relative HNE mOd’ .
! MnSOD suppressed the generation of irradiation—induced iﬁed protein-staining intensity against the relative ROS .
I
Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code , '4'

"
"9","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1037
V W l
(A) 2 h control WW 1
WWW '
(B) 2 h after18.8 Gy
V V
(C) 4h control WWW ]
1
Vv V' i
(D) 4 h after18.8 Gy . i
!
(E) 4 h after 18.8 Gy WWW ‘
100Ulml Cu,Zn, $013+ }
l—l 1
2 mT 1
Figure 5. Detection of NADH/succinate-dependent 02"" production in isolated mitochondria. Detection of NADH/succinate-dependent 02' "" ‘
production was performed in isolated mitochondria by ESR spectrometry using CYPMPO. Open inverted triangles indicate signals that
originated from hydroxyl radicals, and the closed inverted triangles indicate signals originating from superoxide anions. In comparison with
Control (A and C), overlapped signals of superoxide and hydroxyl radicals were seen at 2 and 4 hours following 18.8 Gy irradiation (B and
D), and the signals disappeared on the addition of CuZnSOD (E) in isolated mitochondria. These results conﬁrmed that HPF levels increase 1‘
"" following the X~ray irradiation (Figure 3). ’
staining intensity (r2 = 0.99; Figure 7C). The results of cellular membrane, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticu- {
Figures 7A—C show a strong positive correlation between lum and mitochondria are involved in the intracellular ‘
mitochondrial ROS, intracellular lipid peroxidation prod- effects of radiation in terms of the transduction and trans-
ucts and apoptosis. location of cell-death signals [4,17]. ‘
Reproductive cell death and mitotic cell death have
CL hydroperoxide detection by DPPP been examined by pathocellular observations [18]. In the 1
radiation ﬁeld, colony formation assays are performed to 1
Mitochondria produced superoxide, and a possible rela— examine the clonogenicity of the cell following irradiation ‘
tionship between X-ray irradiation and a major component [18]. Kerr proposed apoptosis, another type of cell death, ‘
of mitochondrial inner membrane cardiolipin, was exam- and it has been shown that irradiation may also result in 1
ined. Peroxidation of cardiolipin was detected using this process [191- I
diphenyl- l-pyrenylphosphine (DPPP). Extracts from HLE Free radicals are a major factor involved in DNA injury '
cells showed an increase in oxidised cardiolipin (CLOOH) in radiation—induced cell death. The majority of free radi-
in irradiated cells (Figure 8A). It is noted that the sample Cals are hydroxyl radicals, which have a half-life of only 1
exhibited a substantial increase of CLOOH immediately microseconds [4,5]. Therefore, it is believed that the initial ‘1
after radiation. Surprisingly, 18.8 Gy X-ray irradiation of cellular events caused by irradiation take place in micro-
cardiolipin alone did not increase oxidation (Figure SB), seconds and are quickly followed by DNA repair. On the
suggesting that intracellular processes are involved in the other hand, the mechanisms of apoptosis have been well
oxidation of cardiolipin. studied and two major pathways, namely, the Fas and
mitochondrial pathways [4,20,21], have been discovered.
However, it is unclear whether other intracellular pro-
Discussion cesses besides DNA damage are involved in radiation-
induced apoptosis, or how apoptosis occurs.
The effects and mechanisms of radiation on cells have In 2001, we showed that MnSOD protected against
been studied for over 40 years. The target in intracellular X-ray irradiation in terms of surviving colony formation
organelles is DNA and cell death is caused by double- and apoptosis [6]. In 2003, Epperly et al. demonstrated ‘
strand breaks [4,18]. The process of cell death occurs in that MnSOD must exist in mitochondria for protection of
two ways: (1) directly — the radiation is absorbed into the colony formation [22]. In the present study, we demon-
cell and directly interacts with DNA; and (2) indirectly — strated that ROS generation be gins immediately after
the radiation interacts with other atoms/molecules in the X-ray irradiation and MnSOD protects against apoptosis
cell (particularly water) to produce free radicals that dis- induced by X-ray irradiation. To clarify the importance of
perse and damage critical targets such as DNA and may MnSOD in. mitochondria, we tested MnSOD without
result in reproductive cell death [4,18]. However, recent ‘ MTS. The present study demonstrated that transfection of
studies have shown that other organelles including the MnSOD vector results in localisation in mitochondria;
"" . Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, U.S. Code

"
"10","' ww Hmead
1 (A) HLE
Control
. HPF
l ""‘ Meani so I ** ** I
i I *1: : :1
50 *i'
' Vector 2* I II I '
‘ 18.8Gy “g 40
' irradiation g
l '5 30
0 1 1:13:55
l ‘ 8
l I 8 20
9 7‘51:
‘ g
‘ MnSOD E 10
, 18-8 Gv
irradiation 0 I l
Control Vector MnSOD MTS(-) ' I
18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy
. irradiation irradiation irradiation
MTS(-)
_ 18.8 Gy _ I
irradiation ’
I
Figure 6. Suppression of mitochondrial ROS generation, lipid peroxidation and apoptosis in MnSOD transfectants, but not MnSOD MTS(—)
transfectants following 18.8 Gy irradiation. A: Mitochondrial ROS generation after 18.8 Gy irradiation at 2 hours, that is, the maximally “I
expressed level, was investigated in control plasmid transfectants (Vector), MnSOD transfectants and MTS(—) plasmid transfectants. Two
hours after irradiation, the cell culture medium was replaced with a modiﬁed Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS). The cells were then I"":
loaded with 10 uM HPF for incubation at 37°C for 15 minutes. In control plasmid transfectants (Vector), the ﬂuorescence intensity increased ""
compared with no irradiation (Control). In MnSOD transfectants, but not MTS(—) transfectants, a significant decrease in intensity is shown, H
indicating that most lipid peroxidation occurs in the mitochondrial area. In addition, the laser confocal images showed ﬂuorescence around II
the nuclei in every picture, indicating that intracellular ROS were generated from the mitochondrial area, as shown as in Bar: mean i S.D.;
**: P<0.0l; Scheﬂe’s F test. B: Intracellular HNE generation (lipid peroxidation). Two hours after irradiation, the cells were ﬁxed and
membranes were permeabilised by incubation in 95% ethanol with 5% acetic acid. After washing, the cells were incubated in a blocking
serum and then with anti-HNE mouse monoclonal antibody. Representative images of immunoﬂuorescence staining and the ﬂuorescence
intensity of non-irradiated control plasmid transfected cells (Control), control plasmid transfected cells (Vector), MnSOD-transfectants
(MnSOD) and MnSOD MTS(—) transfectants after 18.8 Gy irradiation are shown. Note that the generation of intracellular HNE was
suppressed in MnSOD-transfected cells. Bar: mean i S.D.; *: P<0.05, **: P<0.0l; Scheffe’s F test. C: Apoptosis. Seventy-two hours
after irradiation, cells were ﬁxed for 30 minutes and then incubated in PBS with 1 mg/ml of Hoechst 33342 stain for 30 minutes. The
percentage of apoptotic cells (apoptotic index) in each culture dish was determined. The apoptotic frequency of non-irradiated control
plasmid transfected cells (Control), control plasmid transfected cells (Vector), MnSOD transfectants (MnSOD) and MnSOD MTS(-) _ I
transfectants after 18.8 Gy irradiation are shown. Compared with the Vector, MnSOD transfectants were more resistant to irradiation. Bar:
mean 1- S.D.; *: P<0.05, **: P<0.01; Scheffe’s F test. I I
however, MnSOD was not localised in the mitochondria MTS(+) and (—) cells (Figure 2D). It is unlikely that I -l
in MTS(-) cells (Figure 1). The expression of MnSOD MnSOD outside the mitochondria will possess activity.
mRNA levels was increased in MTS(-) cells (Figure 2B), because Mn will be inserted in MnSOD only inside mito—
but the activities of MnSOD in MTS(—) cells were not chondria. The other possibility is that translated MTS(—) .
increased as authentic MnSOD (Figure 2C). The activity might not be able to take a positive 3D formation in the '
seen in [MTS(—)] cells could come from endogenous cytosol.
SOD (Figure 2C). It is unclear why protein transfected by Our study demonstrated that ROS detected by HPF I
VCCtOT [MTS("")] iS much less than that by the authentic using confocal microscopy were increased following irra-
MnSOD vector. The process of MnSOD protein produc- diation, and that the intensity further increased and reached .
tion might involve translation or protein maturation prob- a maximum at 2 hours after irradiation, followed by
lems. Inside cells, translated MnSOD amino acid chains decreasing intensity (Figures 3A and B). Our ESR expel""-
are transported into mitochondria and MTS is cleaved iments conﬁrmed the ROS were hydroxyl radicals and
before the chain takes a 3D formation and the protein superoxide anions, although the signal was greater at 4
adopts the active form [23]. Our in vitro results of synthe-‘ hours, compared with that at 2 hours (Figure 5). The dlf'
SiSCd MnSOD showed positive SOD activity in both ferences between confocal and ESR results are not Clear,
‘ Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, U.S. Code '
l

"
"11","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1039
t
(B) HLE ‘
Control
HNE '
Mean : SD l—H—*‘——I
50 IM—*—I 1m-
Vector g I H H I
18.8 Gy g 40 '
irradiation #2
“Q 30 .
C ‘
o :31;
8 20
9 ‘
0
MnSOD E 10
18.8Gy
irradiation o
Control Vector MnSOD MTS(-)
18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy
irradiation irradiation irradiation '
MTS(-)
, 18.8 Gy ‘
irradiation
(c) Hoechst*
l ** | '
I—u——I
HLE Mean i SD [——-1.. .1. u
’3 0'7 l—jr—H—ﬂ
i 0.6
5‘
g 0.5
:7 0.4
E 0.3
3 0.1 ‘
. . . 0 7 '7
Vect0r18-8 GY '""ad'at'on Control Vector MnSOD MTS(-)
18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy 18.8 Gy ‘
irradiation irradiation irradiation
Figure 6. (Continued)
but might be due to the use of whole live cells (Figures by X-ray irradiation and is associated with apoptosis [6].
3A and B) and isolated mitochondria (Figure 5). Notably, The present study clearly indicates that intracellular ROS
ROS produced by ionizing irradiation should disappear in were generated during irradiation and demonstrated that
nanoseconds t0 microseconds. Our study clearly showed the amount of ROS increased in the period following irra-
greater amounts of ROS generated from mitochondria f01- diation, reaches a maximum at 2 hours and declined there-
lowing irradiation (Figures 3A, B and 5)- Leach et a1. after. This study also suggested that intracellular ROS
(2001) ICPOIth that ROS generation occurs within min- increased after irradiation causing subsequent lipid per-
utes 0f irradiation, although the relevance between ROS oxidation (HNE) and cell death. The relationship between
and 0611 death was I10t examined [241- They proposed that ROS, lipid peroxidation and apoptosis is strongly corre—
mitochondrial potential depolarisation is the cause of ROS lated (Figure 7). In biological systems, HNE originates
generation [24} We reported that alkaline conditions and almost exclusively from phospholipid-bound arachidonic
ischemia-reperfusion induce intracellular ROS generation acid and may be‘ the most reliable and sensitive marker of
from mitochondria, fOIIOWCd by lipid peroxidation and C611 lipid peroxidation [27]. In vitro studies have revealed that
death or apoptosis [25,26]. Further, we reported in 2001 ' HNE at relatively high concentrations causes rapid cell
that superoxide generation from mitochondria increases death associated with the depletion of sulfhydryl groups,
Material ma be rotected b co ri ht law Title 17, US. Code

"
"12","1040 H. P. Indo et a1. .
(A) 0.5 (B) 0.5 (C) 40 _
E MTS H :2"" MTS H 38
m 8 0.4 v m § 0.4 E g MTS (-) 1,
8 °\° 0.3 8 °\° 0.3 g, Q
g g MnSOD g g MnSOD g g 34 \MnSOD -
8 0.2 8 0.2 “- E ;
E; y = 0.03x — 0.68 g y = 0.06x - 1.64 "" 32 y = 0.54x + 17.13 ,
- 12: 1.00 ~— 12: 1.00 [2:099 .:
0.1 0.1 30 .
25 30 35 4O 30 32 34 36 38 40 25 30 35 40
Fluorescence intensity (HPF) Fluorescence intensity (HNE) Fluorescence intensity (HPF) ‘
Figure 7. Correlation between mitochondrial ROS, intracellular lipid peroxidation protein-adducts and apoptosis in the three cell conditions. i
A: Linear-regression analysis showing the relationship between relative HPF staining intensity (mitochondrial ROS) and apoptosis frequency -;
(12 = 1.00). B: Relationship between the relative HNE protein-adduct staining intensity and relative apoptosis frequency (intracellular lipid
peroxidation products) (r2 = 1.00). C: Relationship between the relative HPF staining intensity and relative HNE protein—adduct staining = 1
(r2 = 0.99). Mitochondrial ROS, intracellular lipid peroxidation products and apoptosis are all strongly correlated. Bar: mean i S.E.
. .1
disturbances in calcium homeostasis, inhibition of key We have also shown that authentic MnSOD but not
metabolic enzymes and inhibition of protein and DNA MnSOD without MTS can protect against cellular inju- L
7 synthesis [27]. ries from hypoxia—reoxygenation assault [26]. These .
Several studies have shown that mitochondria produce studies suggest that MnSOD is efﬁcient in protecting 7'
superoxide, mainly from complexes I and IH of the elec— against cellular injuries by oxidative stress only when ;
tron transport chain (ETC) located in the inner mem- it is located in mitochondria and that mitochondria are :1
brane of mitochondria [28, 29]. Production of ROS by the primary sites of oxidant-induced cellular oxidative 1
the ETC may result in oxidative stress in cells and apop- injury. .7
totic cell death [25]. It has been shown that MnSOD is Hypothesis how ROS increase from mitochondrial inner _
an essential enzyme that scavenges superoxide located in membrane was discussed by several researchers. N akagawa j_
mitochondria [30]. The biological importance of MnSOD has addressed mechanisms of cell death and concluded that ‘
has been demonstrated in many reports the expression of peroxidation of CL, which is a component of the inner '
MnSOD is essential for the survival of aerobic life and membrane of mitochondria, initiates apoptosis [31,32] 1
the development of cellular resistance to oxygen radical- when CL is lost upon peroxidation. CL hydroperoxide I
mediated toxicity. We ﬁrst demonstrated in 1998 that (CLOOH), in contrast to CL, does not bind to cytochrome ‘
superoxide generated in mitochondria is related to apop- c (cyt 0). Furthermore, CLOOH can open the permeabil- -
tosis by using MnSOD overexpressing cells in 1998 [25]. ity transition pore by inactivating adenine nucleotide .
a
(A) HLE cells (B) Cardiolipin ;
3.5 *1: 35 i
[_—*—'——| '
c 3.0 l——-———. c 3.0 1 a
2 9 '
E 2.5 E 2.5 a
8 8
m' 20 16 2.0 ‘ .
2. a 1..
I 1-5 :1: 1-5 ;
O O
3 1.0 3 1.0 1
o o
0.0 0.0 7.
Irradiation (-) Immediately 2 hrs after CL standard CL standard '.
after irradiation Irradiation (-) Irradiation (+)
irradiation . .
Figure 8. Detection of CL peroxidation (CLOOH). A: CL was extracted from cells, and CLOOH formation (CLOOH nmol/CLI nmol)) W38 1;
measured and the ratio versus Control was plotted. The ﬁgure shows the relative expressiOn of CLOOH just following 18.8 Gy irradiation f
and 2 hours later in HLE cells. The results showed that oxidised cardiolipin (CLOOH) in irradiated cells signiﬁcantly increased after 18.3 11
Gy irradiation. Bar: Mean t SE. *: P<0.05, “‘2 P<0.01; Scheffe’s F test. B: After 18.8 Gy irradiation, CL and CLOOH formation :1
(CLOOH nmol/CLl nmol)) was measured and plotted in CL alone and CL 18.8 Gy-irradiated samples. After 18.8 Gy X-ray irradiation. :
CL alone showed no increase in oxidation. Bar: Mean i SB. No signiﬁcant difference exists between the groups.
Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code

"
"13","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1041
(ADP/ATP) translocase (ANT). These studies suggest MnSOD overexpression. (Figures 6A, B and C). Therefore, [
' that mitochondrial PHGPx inhibits the release of cyt c from the Fenton and Haber-Weiss reactions do not correspond
. mitochondria by scavenging CLOOH and may prevent with these results. We previously examined the effect of
' apoptosis. Kagan et al. showed that the oxidation of CL MnSOD in alkaline condition [25], X-ray irradiation [6], '
'I is catalysed by CL-speciﬁc peroxidase activity of CL- Hypoxia-reoxidation [26] and cells with impaired electron
' bound cyt c. Moreover, they showed that oxidised CL is transport chain and mitochondrial DNA damage [35,36].
required for the release of proapoptotic factors [33]. Dayal Reduced amounts of ROS were consistently observed when
et al. proposed the hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunc- MnSOD was overexpressed. Therefore, the reduced amounts
tion originating from Complex II can contribute to radi— of ROS by MnSOD transfection as observed cannot be
ation-induced genomic instability by increasing the explained by the Fenton reaction and Haber-Weiss reaction.
steady-state levels of reactive oxygen species [34]. Bar— Both reactions should increase ROS generation but were
jaktarovic et a1. irradiated the heart of C57BL/6N mice decreased by MnSOD transfection.
with doses of 0.2 Gy or 2 Gy (X-ray, 200 kV) at the age Superoxide radicals can react with NO to form per-
of 8 weeks [35]. They demonstrated that 2 Gy irradiation oxynitrite in high yield because N 0 contains an unpaired 3
caused functional impairment as partial deactivation of electron [40]. Peroxynitrite is a potent biological oxidant
‘ Complex I (32%) and Complex H1 (11%), decreased suc- that has recently been implicated in diverse forms of free ‘
cinate-driven respiratory capacity (13%) in mitochondria, radical-induced tissue injury [41,42]. The reaction of per- 1
increased levels of ROS and enhanced oxidation of mito- oxynitrite with membrane lipids induces a phospholipid r
chondrial proteins. They also demonstrated changes in membrane peroxidation product without the requirement 1
pyruvate metabolism and structural proteins with both of iron [43]. Various aldehydes are generated as ﬁnal
low and high radiation doses. Their results show the products when lipid hydroperoxides break down. Among
importance of ETC and ROS generation in protection them, HNE is a highly toxic nine-carbon a,B-unsaturated
against cell death from X—ray irradiation. aldehyde that can be generated by the peroxidation of (0-6
The present study showed that peroxidation of CL unsaturated fatty acids, such as arachidonic acid and lino-
occurred only in cells (Figure 8), suggesting that pertur- leic acid [27,44]. Peroxynitrous acid (protonated forms of
bation of ETC by X-ray irradiation or peroxidation pro- peroxynitrite) subsequently produces '0H and nitrogen '
cesses activated by molecules like cyt c begins just after dioxide radicals (NOZ'), resulting in oxidation and nitra-
. X—ray irradiation, and a vast amount of peroxidation accu— tion, respectively [41]. The results of the present study
_ mulates from mitochondria over a period of time resulting might suggest that MnSOD inhibits the formations of
l in further CL peroxidation, release of cyt c, and apopto- peroxynitrite (ONOO’) by decreasing superoxide levels, ‘1
sis. We previously reported that mitochondrial DNA the production of which is increased by X-ray irradiation .
damage and the mitochondrial impaired ETC induced due to mitochondrial inner membrane peroxidation
further mitochondrial ROS [36, 37]. Mitochondria play (Figure 8).
central roles in cell death including apoptosis and Our results showed that the level of mitochondrial reac-
autophagy [38, 39]. tive oxygen species (ROS) increased and reached a maxi- I
The present study showed that ROS were increased fol- mum level 2 hours after X-ray irradiation. Authentic
lowing X-ray irradiation (Figure 3). Most of ROS were MnSOD, but not MnSOD [MTS(—)] protected against
from mitochondria (Figures 3A and 4). The ROS detected mitochondrial ROS, lipid peroxidation and subsequent I
are hydroxyl radicals and peroxynitrite in its quarter—level apoptosis, which were caused by X-ray irradiation. In
of the hydroxyl radicals, due to the chemical property of addition, the levels of mitochondrial ROS were found to
HPF [12]. Hydroxyl radicals are produced from the Fenton always correlate with the levels of authentic MnSOD in
reaction (1) or Haber-Weiss reaction. Thus, they are mitochondria. These results suggest that only when
formed from hydrogen peroxide (H202) and superoxide MnSOD is located in mitochondria is it efﬁcient in pro-
(02""). Fenton reaction is deﬁned as tecting against cellular injuries by X—ray irradiation and
Fe“ + H202 _> Fe“ + 'OH + OH“ (1) that rmtochontlria'are the critical srtes of X—ray-mduced
cellular ox1dat1ve injuries.
Haber—Weiss reaction is initiated by
+ -— +
F63 + 07- -) Fez + 02 (2) Declaration of interest
The second step is the Fenton reaction (1), and the overall
reaction is The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest. This
._ _ . work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
02 + H202 "" OH + OH + 02 (3) Research (C) (No. 22592093 to H.J.M, No. 23590064 to
Cells with more MnSOD should generate more 11202 due IN) and the Strategic Promotion Program for Basic N uclear
to more substrate being available for reactions, and more Research (to H.J.M.) of the Ministry of Education, .
'OH should be produced by Fenton and Harber-Weiss reac- Culture, Sports,'Science and Technology of J apan, and the
tions. However, in this study, the levels of ROS ('OH), sub- Program for Promotion of Basic and Applied Researches
sequent lipid peroxidation and apoptosis were decreased by ‘ for Innovations in Bio-oriented Industry (BRAIN) (to
l ' Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code

"
"14","1042 H. P. lndo et al.
H.J.M.) by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fish- [19] Kerr JFR. Searle J . Apoptosis: Its nature and kinetic role. In- L
eries of Japan. Meyn RE, Withers HR, editors. Radiation Biology in Cancel: j
Research. New York: Raven Press; 1980. pp. 367—384. I
[20] Hengartner MO. The biochemistry of apoptosis. Nature |
2000;407:770—776.
References [21] Rich T, Allen RL, Wyllie AH. Defying death after DNA dam-
age. Nature 2000;407:777—783.
[1] Riley PA. Free radicals in biology: oxidative stress and the [22] Epperly MW, GrettorrJE, Sikora CA, Jefferson M, Bemarding ]
effects of ionizing radiation. Int J Radiat Biol 1994;65: M, N ie 8, et al. Mitochondrial localization of superoxide dis-
27-33. mutase is required for decreasing radiation-induced cellular
[2] Schmidt-Ullrich RK, Dent P, Grant S, Mikkelsen RB, Valerie damage. Radiat Res 2003;160:568—578.
K. Signal transduction and cellular radiation responses. Radiat [23] Gakh O, Cavadini P, Isaya G. Mitochondrial processing pep.
Res 2000;153:245—257. tides. Biochim Biophys Acta 2002;1592163-77.
[3] Wallace SS. Enzymatic processing of radiation-induced free [24] Leach JK, Tuyle GV, Lin P-S, Schmidt-Ullrich R, Mikkelsen
radical damage in DNA. Radiat Res 1998;150(5 Suppl):S60— RB. Ionizing radiation—induced, mitochondria-dependent gen-
S79. eration of reactive oxygen/nitrogen. Cancer Res 2001 ;61:3894—
[4] Majima HJ, Indo HP, Tomita K, Suenaga S, Motoori S, 3901.
Kato H, et al. Intracellular oxidative stress caused by [25] Majima HJ, Oberley TD, Furukawa K, Mattson MP, Yen H-C,
ionizing radiation. In: Singh K., editor. Oxidative Stress, Szweda LI, et al. Prevention of mitochondrial injury by man.
Disease and Cancer. London: Imperial College Press; 2006. ganese superoxide dismutase reveals a primary mechanism for
pp. 61—83. alkaline-induced cell death. J Biol Chem 1998;273:8217~
[5] Buettner GR, Jurkiewicz BA. Catalytic metals, ascorbate and 8224.
. free radicals: combinations to avoid. Radiat Res 1996;145: [26] Hirai F, Motoori S, Kakinuma S, Tomita K, lndo HP, Kato H,
532—541. et a1. Mitochondrial signal lacking manganese superoxide dis-
[6] Motoori S, Majima HJ, Ebara M, Kato H, Hirai F, Kakinuma mutase failed to prevent cell death by reoxygenation following .
S, et al. Overexpression of mitochondrial manganese superox- hypoxia in a human pancreatic cancer cell line, KP4. Antioxid l 1
, ide dismutase protects against radiation-induced cell death in "" Redox Signal 2004;62523—535. I ]
the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HLE. Cancer Res [27] Esterbauer H, Schaur RJ, Zollner H. Chemistry and biochem- I w
2001;61:5382—5388. istry of 4—hydroxynonenal, malonaldehyde, and related alde- ‘
[7] Ho Y-S, Crapo JD. Isolation and characterization of comple- hydes. Free Radic Biol Med 1991;11:81—128. I ‘
mentary DNAs encoding human manganese-containing super- [28] Boveris A, Cadenas E. Mitochondrial production of superoxide
oxide dismutase. FEBS Lett 1988;229:256—260. anions and its relationship to the antimycin insensitive respira-
[8] Lithgow T. Targeting of proteins to mitochondria. FEBS Lett tion. FEBS Lett 1975;54:311—314.
2000;476:22—26. [29] Takeshige K, Minakami S. NADH- and NADPH-dependent I
[9] Mihara K, Omura T. Cytoplasmic chaperones in precursor formation of superoxide anions by bovine heart submitochon- I
targeting to mitochondria: the role of MSF and hsp70. Trends drial particles and NADH-ubiquinone reductase preparation. I
in Cell Biol 1996;6z104-108. Biochem J 1979;180:129—135.
[10] Dor I, Namba M, Sato J . Establishment and some biological [30] Weisiger RA, Fridovich I. Mitochondrial superoxide dismutase.
characteristics of human hepatoma cell lines. Gann J Biol Chem 1973;248:4793—4796.
1975;66:385—392. [31] Imai H, Nakagawa Y. Biological signiﬁcance of phospholipid
[11] Beauchamp C, Fridovich I. Superoxide dismutase: improved hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (PHGPx, GPx4) in
assays and an assay applicable to acrylamide gels. Anal Bio— mammalian cells. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34:145-169.
chem 1971;44:276—287. [32] Nakagawa Y. Role of mitochondrial phospholipid hydroperox-
[12] Setsukinai K, Urano Y, Kakinuma K, Majima H], N agano T. ide glutathione peroxidase (PHGPx) as an antiapoptotic factor.
Development of novel ﬂuorescence probes that can reliably Biol Pharm Bull 2004;27:956—960.
detect reactive oxygen species and distinguish speciﬁc species. [33] Kagan VE, Tyurin VA, Jiang J, Tyurina YY, Ritov VB, Amo-
J Biol Chem 2003;278:3170—3175. scato AA, et a1. Cytochrome c acts as a cardiolipin oxygenase
[13] Ogura A, Oowada S, Kon Y, Hirayama A, Yasui H, Meike S, required for release of proapoptotic factors. Nat Chem Biol
et al. Redox regulation in radiation—induced cytochrome c 2005:1;223—232.
release from mitochondria of human lung carcinoma A549 [34] Dayal D, Martin SM, Owens KM, Aykin-Burns N, Zhu Y, 4
cells, Cancer Lett 2009;277:64—71. Boominathan A, et al. Mitochondrial complex 11 dysfunction
[14] Toyokuni S, Miyake N, Hiai H, Hagiwara M, Kawakishi S, can contribute signiﬁcantly to genomic instability after expo- .
Osawa T, et al. The monoclonal antibody speciﬁc for the sure to ionizing radiation. Radiat Res 2009;172:737—745.
4-hydroxy—2-nonenal histidine adduct. FEBS Lett 1995;359: [35] Barjaktarovic Z, Schmaltz D, Shyla A, Azimzadeh O, Schulz
189—191. S, Haagen J , et al. Radiation-induced signaling results in mito-
[15] Rouser G, Siakotos AN, Fleischer S. Quantitative analysis of chondrial impairment in mouse heart at 4 weeks after exposure
phospholipids by thin-layer chromatography and phosphorus to X—rays. PLoS One 2011;6ze27811. Epub 2011 Dec 8.
analysis of spots. Lipids 1966:1;85—86. [36] lndo HP, Davidson M, Yen H-C, Suenaga S, Tomita K, Nishii
[16] Dent P, Yacoub A, Contessa J , Caron R, Amorino G, Valerie T, et al. Evidence of ROS generation by mitochondria in cells
K, et al. Stress and radiation-induced activation of multiple with impaired electron transport chain and mitochondrial DNA
intracellular signaling pathways. Radiat Res 2003;159: damage. Mitochondrion 2007;7:106—118. '
283-300. [37] Majima HJ, lndo HP, Suenaga S, Kaneko T, Matsui H, Yen
[17] Hosokawa Y, Sakakura Y, Tanaka L, Okumura K, Yajima T, H—C, et al. Mitochondria as Source of Free Radicals. In: Naito .
Kaneko M, et a1. Radiation-induced apoptosis is independent Y, Suematsu M, Yoshikawa T, editors. Free Radical Biology I
of caspase-8 but dependent on cytochrome c and the caspase-9 in Digestive Diseases, Front Gastrointest Res. Basel, Karger; .
cascade in human leukemia HL60 cells. J Radiat Res 2011. vol 29, pp 12—22.
2005;46:293-303. [38] Majima H], lndo HP, Tomita K, [washita Y, Suzuki H, Masada
[18] Hall H]. DNA strand breaks and chromosomal aberrations. In: D, et a1. Bio-assessment of risk in long-term manned space 1
Hall H], editor. Radiobiology for the Radiologist 4th ed. Phil-- explor‘ation — cell death factors in space radiation and/or miCI’O' '
adelphia: JB Lippencott Company; 1994. pp. 15—27. gravity: a review. Biol Sci Space 2009;23:43—53. .
' Material ma be rotected b co: rioht law Title 17, U.S. Code ‘

"
"15","Mitochondrial ROS promote apoptosis induced by X-ray irradiation 1043
[39] Majima HJ, Indo HP, Suenaga S, Matsui H, Yen H-C, [42] Keller JN, Kindy MS, Holtsberg FW, St Clair DK, Yen H-C, r
Ozawa T, et a1. Mitochondria as Possible pharmaceutical Germeyer A, et a1. Mitochondrial manganese superoxide dis- \
targets for the effects of vitamin E and its homologues in mutase prevents neural apoptosis and reduces ischemic brain
‘ oxidative stress-related diseases. Curr Pharm Des 2011;17: injury: suppression of peroxynitn'te production, lipid peroxidation, '
‘ 2190—2195. and mitochondrial dysfunction. J Neurosci 1998;18:687—697.
4 [40] Blough NV, Zaﬂriou 0C. Reaction of superoxide with nitric [43] Radi R, Beckman 18, Bush KM, Freeman BA. Peroxynitrite- w
. oxide to form peroxonitrite in alkaline aqueous solution. Inorg induced membrane lipid peroxidation: The cytotoxic potential ]
] Chem 1985;24:3502-3504. of superoxide and nitric oxide. Arch Biochem Biophys ?
] [41] Beckman JS, Beckman TW, Chen J, Marshall PA, Freeman 1991;288:481—487. ‘
J BA. Apparent hydroxyl radical production by peroxynitrite: [44] Pryor WA, Porter NA. Suggested mechanisms for the produc-
"" Implications for endothelial injury from nitric oxide and super- tion of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal from the autoxidation of polyun- 2
‘ oxide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:1620-1624. saturated fatty acids. Free Radic Biol Med 1990;82541—543. ,
n I
‘ u
]
] )
1
i
' Material ma be rotected b co riht law Title 17, US. Code

"
