"","x"
"1","i1 T R E N D 5 IN
FOOD SCIENCE
136be Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 353—366 ETEC HNOLOGY
Review
. . O O .
bIOtEChnOIOgIES Demetrlos Ghanotakls’ and
O 0 Ca
I. d t f d Marla Teresa Glardl
app le 0 sa er an alnstitute of Crystallography, National Research
a Council of Italy, CNR, 00015 Monterotondo Scalo,
healtl‘ﬂer fOOd Rome, Italy (Tel.: +39 06 90672631; fax: +39 06
90672630; e-mail: giuseppina.rea@ic.cnr.it)
rOd ""Cti 0n . The '0Department of Biology and Biotechnology ”Charles
p ' Darwin”, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy
CInstitute of Plant Physiology, Martin-Luther University
N Utra-SnaCk Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 10,
D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
. h ° dDepartment of Biochemistry, Institute of Soil Science
man UfaCtu rl ""g C al n and Plant Cultivation, State Research Institute,
ul. Czartoryskich 8, 24-100 Pulawy, Poland
Giuseppina Reaar’k Amina eDepartment of Molecular Sciences Applied to
.a ’ a Biosystems (DISMAB), University of Milano,
AntonaCCl , Maya Lambreva , Via Trentacoste 2, 20134 Milano, Italy
0a 0 f . .
Sandro Pastorelll , Arlanna Department of Pharmaceutical 8c1ences,
. .a . °b . Vla Bonanno 33, 56126 Pisa, Italy
TIbUZZI , Slmone Ferrarl , Dll‘k gCRA-FSO Research Unit of Floriculture, Corso Inglesi
- c - . c 508, Sanremo 18038, Italy
FISCher f UdO JOhannlndngIer ’ hUniversity of Perpignan Via Domitia (UPVD),
W|eslaw ()Ieszek , Teresa IMAGES EA4218, 52 avenue Paul Alduy, 66860
d . Perpignan, France
DOI‘OSZEWSka ’ AngEIa Marla iNational Institute for Biological Sciences Bucharest,
C e O 0 Ce 0
Rlzzo , PatrIZIa V.R. Berselll , _ 060031 Bucharest, Romama
e JDepartment of Chemistry, University of Crete,
Bruno Berra r Voutes- Heraklion, Crete, Greece
-f
Alessandra Bertoll ,
. . .f . . _ . . . _
LUIsa PISteul , Barbara RUffonlg, The EU prOJect Nu1ra Snack estabhshed an Integrated selen
h tIfIC and technological framework to Introduce conventlonal
car0|e calaS-BlanChard , and new biotechnologies into the nutraceutical industry. The
. h purpose was to promote novel ready-to—eat snacks enriched
lean LOUIS Marty I with natural antioxidant/radical-scavenging compounds. En—
' ' i hancement of valuable compounds production in plant cells
. Slmon.a carmen LItESCZU ’ and in vitro cultures were achieved by different elicitation
MII‘EIa Dlaconu', EIthheﬂOS strategies, and exhaustive metabolites profiling obtained by
. i high-resolution analytical techniques. Finally, innovative
TOUIOUPakIS I enzyme-based biosensors were developed for food products
* Corresponding author.
0924-2244/$ - see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
d0i:10.1016/j.tifs.2011.04.005

"
"2","354 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366
functional activity and safety properties assessment. This related functions can counteract oxidizing species and p0—
review provides an overview of the technologies selected, in- tentially restore a healthy cellular redox balance
tegrated and tested in NUTRA-SNACK and recent literature (Badimon, Vilahur, & Padre, 2010). Interestingly, by apply—
strengthening integrated approaches in modern food process ing the newly acquired knowledge on human genome se—
manufacturing. quencing, molecular biology revealed that speciﬁc
antioxidant compounds modulate various cellular functions,
Towards a healthy natural nutrition acting not only as radical scavengers, but also as regulators
Oxidative stress is a process resulting from an imbalance of genes and enzymes expression. This approach gives rise
between excessive production of reactive oxygen species to the new sciences 0f nutrigenomics and nutrigenetics
and/or nitrogen species and limited action of antioxidant de— Which consider the relationship between speciﬁc nutrient
fenses. It is a particularly harmful health risk factor, common or diet and gene expression and determine how genetic var—
t0 the development of severalchronic pathologies (Fig. 1) and iability affects the response to diet (Knasmiiller er al.,
believed to play a major role in the aging process (Cataldi, 2008). In this scenario, nutraceutics gain a new added value
2010; Reuter, Gupta, Chaturvedi, & Aggarwal, 2010). for the development of novel food and personalized diets.
For this reason, antioxidative effects of dietary factors Such beneﬁts are subjected to strict EU regulations to
have recently achieved a high level of public interest. In— control and guarantee consumers’ health. In 2006 Regula—
deed, With proper nourishment, the body can maintain 011 tion CE 1924/24 established the requirement to indicate
its own the equilibrium between the production and scaV— proven effects on health of the food supplements and nutra—
enging of reactive oxygen species. An enhancement in di— ceutical ingredients used/commercialized by companies. In
etary intake of antioxidants and phytochemicals with 2008 Reg CE 109/2008 and 353/2008 further implemented
(Urbanization and / /
population increase ~Diet
~lndustrial and agriculture ~Smoking habit ~Resplratlon
activities Alcohol and drugs °Fatty acid oxidation
~Exposure to radiation consumption oArginine metabolism \
and chemical pollutants ~Decreased physical -Phagocytosis ° gardiac Fibrosis
. ~Reduced air, water and activity ypenension ' ’
soil quality ‘ /\\\'\schﬂ“a
l Environmental l . l Metabolic . M \\
factors we Style processes DSCUIar Degenerati
geﬂeraﬁOn Cat On’Retinal
/‘\\\\' eracts
V v v V \x
e .
Dema%nlng' psonélsis
\ 8' Melanom ’
/‘ \\ a
antioxidants ° IZheimer P
. a '
@ Cancer.Autis.:“""s°""'Str0ke,
e S S‘em /\\\\
deienc o Ch . \\
ronIC Inflam .
Ca""'Cer edlsomer' Lu
R05 \ \\
' Diabete
. S.A '
% FahQUe ge'n9.Chronic
oxudatlve /\\\\\\\
stress
Ne
QaﬁVe effects 0"" hu
man hgam‘
Fig. 1. The main factors and protagonists in the development of oxidative stress and the possible negative outcomes to human health. ROS/RNS —
Reactive Oxygen or Nitrogen Species.

"
"3","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366 355

Reg. 1924/2006 by requiring the submission to EFSA/ feasible because of their highly complex structures
EMEA of scientiﬁc evidence resulting from human studies, (Oksman—Caldentey & Inzé, 2004).
to obtain speciﬁc authorization for risk factor reduction In this context, our pre—industrial research project Nutra—
Claims. That is a heavy obligation for companies to invest Snack had the objective to demonstrate the application of
in scientiﬁc research for their products and opens the way plant cell culture extracts in novel nutraceutical food for—
for important cooperation activities with research mulation, by establishing and suggesting a production pro—
institutions. cess based on a set of reliable and efﬁcient biotechnology

Faced with a highly diverse food supply, consumers can tools, suitably tuned to meet industrial, nutritional and reg—
take advantage of a wide variety of dietary intake of micro— ulatory requirements (Rea, er al., 2010) (Fig. 2).
and macro—nutrients. Nowadays, the consumption of mid—
day and/or midnight snack food is a dominant eating— In Vitro plant culture biotechnologies
habit. Eating small amounts of food on a regular basis is A large—scale industrial production of phytochemicals
considered healthy, but often snacks available in the market cannot rely on in—ﬁeld cultivation whose yield depends on
provide excess calories and fats and little or no nutrient seasonal and environmental conditions. Recent advances
value to the diet. Moreover, most snacks contain preserva— in methods for functional metabolites production by
tives, sweeteners and ﬂavoring that can have serious in vitro plant cultures allowed their exploitation as Chemical
negative effects on health. The limits imposed by modern factories. The driving force leading scientists to Challenge
life—styles on eating—habits create a necessity to develop plant cell culture shortcomings is the plant cell totipotency
an adequate food management rather than simply body— and the assumption that in appropriate conditions single
weight control. Therefore, eXperts from the food somatic cell can survive independently, divide and generate
manufacturing industry are addressing their efforts towards a complete plant producing and accumulating many of the
establishing modern alimentary strategies aimed at con— same valuable compounds as the parent plants. However,
sumers who believe in health through correct nutrition despite a long standing interest and signiﬁcant efforts, only
and food supplementation. One of these strategies is based a few products obtained by in vitro plant cultures have been
on plant extracts exploitation. Plants can play a major role commercialized, such as shikonin by Lithospermum eryth-
as basic ingredients of our diet and their nutritional and me— rorthizon and ginseng derivative from Panax ginseng
dicinal values have been recognized since ancient times. (Weathers, Towler, & Xu, 2010). This is due to several limi—
Many epidemiological and experimental evidences support tations of plant cell cultures, particularly the low yields of
the hypothesis that vegetables and fruits in the diet can re— desired metabolites, the biochemical and genetic instability
duce risk of diseases (Centers for Disease Control and of the culture over time, and several difﬁculties resulting
Prevention, 2010). This has led to the use of a number of from the scale—up. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that
phytometabolites as preventive and/or protective agents, in vitro cultivation can also induce cryptic metabolic pro—
promoting a dramatic increase in their consumption as die— cesses leading to the accumulation of additional metabolites
tary supplements (Badimon er al., 2010; Caputi & Aprea, with functional proprieties. The very recent establishment of
2011). suspension culture derived from Taxus cuspidata, the source

In addition to the essential primary metabolites like car— of the key anticancer drug paclitaxel (Taxol), opened the way
bohydrates, lipids and amino acids, plants are capable of towards the exploitation of innately undifferentiated cambial
synthesizing an amazing variety of low—molecular—weight meristematic cells as a source of important plant natural
organic compounds, called secondary metabolites, usually products, allowing to bypass the routinely encountered prob—
with unique and complex structures. They are endowed lems related to cultivation of dedifferentiated cells on an
with functional activity that provides health beneﬁts beyond industrial scale (Lee et al., 2010).
basic nutrition (Table 1) and already are very important Plant cell suspensions, tissue, and organ culture in vitro
industrial and economic sources of many drugs. Unfortu— techniques were used in the Nutra—Snack research to assess
nately, their production rate is usually very low, often less conditions for a large—scale pre—industrial metabolite pro—
than 1—5% of the dry weight. Since secondary metabolites duction. Selection criteria included the screening of several
contribute mainly to adjustment and adaptation to the traditional medicinal parental plants for their ability to pro—
changing conditions in plants’ natural habitat, their produc— Vide callus and in vitro suspension cultures (Fig. 3), eXpress
tion can be often enhanced or induced in response to biotiC antioxidant/radical—scavenging activity molecules and
and abiotic stress conditions. The lack of abundance of the accumulate high levels of these valuable compounds. The
natural content of the valuable compounds in a plant, some— overall bioprocess costs were also considered in order to se—
times together with a lack of raw material (some types can lect the best candidate for a cost—effective pre—industrial
only be isolated from rare plants), makes their production production. Finally, since the research was aimed to food
difﬁcult. Moreover, the large—scale growth of plant cell cul— applications, all the selected species were important medic—
tures for industrial production of plant—derived ﬁne chemi— inal and aromatic plants and/or model plants in botany
cals, still presents several limitations. On the other hand, having awell characterized phytochemical proﬁle. Success—
Chemical synthesis is often not technically or commercially fully obtained plants cell cultures included among the

"
"4","356 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366
Table 1. Secondary metabolites, dietary sources, structures and related functional activities.
METABOLITES STRUCTURE PROPERTIES
dietary sources representative compound g
L; (2 [2 L; Z
E: m < .— Q
Q ._.1 O ...l (/1 CD [—-
E— m S SE :3 E E 8
Z 8 M ._1 0‘ E E- U) o: [—
< M L” U L” [— CZ. i: m C
Q o... E— m U W Lu '-' 3 Dd
<2 5 e _ g 2 a E 2 a o
E— o: E— — E— [— 2 £— £— .— ,7)
Z < Z Z Dd Z 2 Z Z E .—
< C.) < < < < —. < < ._1 >
1.2
(carrot, tomato, H c“, N, we cu, «I «I \I «I
spinach, broccoli,
kale, wol er
ﬂ) ry) zeaxanthin
Phytosterols 3’4 ”0 .0 H
(sea buckthorn 01%“. «I «I «I \/
corn oil, soybean ""H
oil)
sitosterol
Phenolic 0H
compounds 5 o 0&0”
\ o
(cichorium, coffee, HOW ‘I ‘1 ‘1 ‘I ‘I ‘I
lettuce, red wine, 0H
rosema , basil
W ) curcumin
Glucosinolates 6 k 0:,
HO I
(cabbages, mustard, ”0 0H s N‘o’sgo «I «I
radish and cress) / NH
glucobrassicin
. . H
Phytlc aold 7 c=E—OH
Ho, 9“ Q 0,, ,OH
(nuts, seeds and 0.30 = “ORG“ «I
grains) Ho :Q 0 ‘1
‘P\,O' ‘O,p~
Ho”o 9 Ho' ‘0“
HO-P=O , ,
5H mosntol hexaphospate
Saponins 8 ""° '__o 0
OH '
(legumes and ""°\_m/.H6; ho 3.
spinach) 2: '{I , . ‘I ‘I ,I NI NI
._ .- xxx]:
I"": '
cucclco ‘} ‘ »
ginsenoside Rbl
Sulphides
9 10
compounds ’ 0'
. v, v v v v v v
(onzons, leeks, \/\S/S\/\
asparagus and
garliC) allicin
('Peterson, Sedjo, Davis, Beam, & Giuliano, 2010, 2Bone & Landrum, 2010, 3Scholle, Baker,
Talati, & Coleman, 2009, 4Rudkowska, 2010, 5Raederstorff, 2009, 6Verkerk et al., 2009, 7Vucenik
& Shamsuddin, 2006, 8Tsai, Chen, Chien, Huang, & Lin, 2010, 9 Cai, Wang, Pei, & Liang, 2007,
‘OAriga & Seki, 2006).

"
"5","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366 357
HEALTHY
. SNACK
3
~
TRIALS
: QUALITY & TOXICITY
O CONTROL ASSESSMENT
METABOLITE EXTRACTION In vitro & in vivo tests
0' | SFEASE. | MTT. BAP. ORAC
ELICITATION ., FREEZE-DRYING . d-ROMs.DPPH.TEAC
# Biosensors
O . W IXSSEENE’TSESBE’BSED
METABOLITE UV-C. JA ,
PROFILE
0 HPLC. UPLC. ’
PLANT GC-MS
IN VITRO LC-DAD-ESl-MS
CULTURES ‘
—
HAIRY—ROOTS
Fig. 2. The Nutra-Snack project route for the production of healthy snack. Schematic of the integration system among all biotechnology and bio-
chemistry methods investigated and successfully tested to transform the natural production of secondary metabolites into a complete production
process of nutraceutical ingredients.
others, M entha, Trifolium, and Echinacea species metabolites during the late plateau phase of the growth curve.
(Krzyzanowska et al., 2011; Lucchesini, Bertoli, The lack of production during the early developmental stages
Mensuali—Sodic, & Pistelli, 2009; Oleszek, Stochmal, & of active growth has been explained by preferentially carbon
Janda, 2007). The formulation of the best adapted media allocation, mainly distributed for primary metabolism (build—
necessary for callus initiation, With special attention to ing of cell structures and respiration) rather than secondary
the mineral and organic constituents, and hormones compo— metabolism. On the other hand, When growth stops, carbon
sition, provided the solution also for the achievement of is no longer necessary in large quantities for the primary me—
huge biomass amount. That is a pre—requisite of any suc— tabolism and secondary compounds are synthesized more in—
cessful industrial production and often represents one of tensively. However, some secondary plant products like
the main bottleneck for commercialization (GeorgieV, photoprotective xanthophyll pigments, Which are oxygen—
Weber, & Maciuk, 2009; Pisseri, Bertoli, & Pistelli, 2008). containing carotenoids, are known to be growth—associated
It is well known that calli can undergo somaclonal var— With undifferentiated cells. These observations were taken
iation usually during several subculture cycles and, as a con— into careful consideration for the harvesting time, extraction
sequence, secondary metabolite production is often variable procedures and future industrial bioreactor design (Ruffoni,
from one subculture cycle to another. Indeed once calli are Pistelli, Bertoli, & Pistelli, 2010).
obtained, they need to be stabilized. After a period of time, A potential promising alternative to the biotechnological
genetic stability may occur and each callus can be consid— exploitation of plant cell suspensions are the hairy root cul—
ered as a homogeneous cell aggregate. Our assumption was tures derived by Agrobacterium rhizogenes. As they can be
that a cell line is not stabilized until growth parameters could sub—cultured and indeﬁnitely propagated on a synthetic me—
be repeated during three consecutive subculture cycles. dium Without phyto—hormones and have the capacity to
When genetic stability has been reached, each callus cell form a profusion of lateral roots, the hairy roots received
line was separately analyzed for its growth rate and metabo— considerable attention from plant biotechnologists inter—
lite proﬁle. This approach allowed an evaluation of the pro— ested in the production of secondary compounds (Mishra
ductivity of each cell line, so that the further cell & Ranjan, 2008). The speciﬁc growth rates are generally
suspension preparation and the subsequent studies were per— comparable, if not superior, to those observed for undiffer—
formed only on the most suitable cell lines (Fig. 3). Gener— entiated cells and biomass doubling times ranges from less
ally, biotechnological cultures produced the secondary than 1 day to almost 1 week. Finally, a major Characteristic

"
"6","358 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366
Species From plantto callus Callus features
a — “—7. -abundant
‘5 h - fragile/ loose
Basil (Ocymum basilicum L.) ' ugreen
_, ,___, -abundant
—r .
W G- ""' - hard and compact
'9 4!! -green
Peppermint(Mentha pipen'ta L.) IIrare necrosisof explants
i -abundant
: {5, z a Q - soft and loose
Trifolium (heldreichianum Hausskn) '«s ‘ ' i . -cream
‘—’ - no necrosis of explants
’
ﬂ -_ _ 2_ __ -abundant
._ - fragile and loose
Soybean (Glycine max L.) .. ' cream
- rare necmsis of explants
& , -abundant
‘ . -fragile
Dandelion (Taraxacum oﬁ'Icinale L.) 'Wh'te .
- little necrosus of explants
\
v -
. . . . -fragile
Salvna (Salwa ofﬁcmahs L.) . green
Fig. 3. Plant species exploited during the Nutra-Snack project for in vitro cultures generation. Description of callus cell lines is related to the genet-
ically stabilized culture.
of hairy roots systems is the production of secondary me— Methods for enhancing metabolites in Vitro
tabolites concomitantly with the culture growth and devel— production
opment. Hence, it is possible to generate a continuous We exploited various approaches to addresses the need for
supply of secondary compounds from actively growing an increased in vitro yield, which encompassed the screening
hairy roots and cultivate roots under light to obtain green and selection of highly productive cell lines, elicitation and
tissue. In addition, combining hairy roots cultivation t0 immobilization procedures. Furthermore, as in recent years
metabolic engineering, bacterial CO—Culture and elicitation metabolic engineering has opened new promising perspec—
strategies provide attractive resource for large—scale pro— tives for improved production in plants or plant cell cultures
duction of commercially valuable compounds (Mehrotra, (Leonard etal.,2010)abi0techn010gica1 molecular approach
Rahman, & Kukreja, 2010; Shi, Kwok, & Wu, 2007; Wu, was undertaken to obtain massive production of antioxidant
Ng, Shi, & Wu, 2007). In our project, a wild strain of A. rhi- peptides in C . reinhardtii cell cultures.
zogenes was used to regenerate twelve in vitro plant lines
from different hairy roots of Hypericum perforatum (St. Elicitation strategies
J 0hn’s Wort). Some of the new cell lines accumulated con— Elicitation refers to the capacity of plants and plant cell
siderably high levels of the antioxidant hyperoside (approx. in vitro cultures to activate protective mechanisms in re—
5 mg/g dried weight) and chlorogenic acid (from 0.47 to sponse to various stress stimuli leading to increased accu—
1.09 mg/g dried weight). Remarkably, one cell line mulation of secondary metabolites.
showed a 10—fold higher content of the anti—depressant The treatment of plant cells with biotic and/or abiotic
hypericin (0.25 mg/g dried weight) compared to that stimuli is a useful strategy to overcome the generally inher—
already reported in the literature for the in vitro shoots ent low yield of plant secondary metabolites and represents
(Bertoli er al., 2008). one of the most promising yield—enhancement tool

"
"7","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366 359
(Weathers er al., 2010). Additionally, this approach does MS. Various bioassays such as production of hydrogen
not require the transfer of cells to a new production medium peroxide, activation of defense genes and protection
and provide an effective response in short time, which are against pathogen infection, conﬁrmed the high biological
biotechnologically important offshoots. activity of the OGs on tobacco, Arabidopsis and soybean

Several plant secondary metabolites have antimicrobial plants (Ferrari er al., 2008).

properties, and their accumulation is part of the defense re— Abiotic elicitors, such as physical factors or Chemical com—
sponse against pathogen attack which is triggered and ac— pounds, have not a biological origin and have been success—
tivated by elicitors, the signal compounds of plant defense fully applied to both plants and plant cell cultures to induce
responses. Effective signal compounds include carbohy— secondary compounds accumulation. Physical elicitations
drates, polypeptides, microbial cell wall components, yeast represent a powerful alternative for large—scale applications,
extract or methyl jasmonate (MeJA), a proven signal com— retaining effectiveness and allowing repeated applications
pound acting in herbivores defenses and wound—healing without to contaminate the desired compound or producing
processes (Reinbothe, Springer, Samol, & Reinbothe, tissue. They include treatments with high light intensities,
2009). MeJA has been used successfully for enhancing high temperatures, and UV—C irradiation (Bhosale, 2004;
production of secondary metabolites such as the taxols de— Vasconsuelo&Boland, 2007). Application of sub—lethal levels
rivatives anticancer taxoids, baccatins, ginsenosides during of electric current elicits the biosynthesis of secondary metab—
cell cultures of many plant species, and the ﬁavonoid hep— olites in a broad range of plant species and in many plant tis—
atoprotective and antioxidant silymarin (Ionkova, 2009; sues such as roots, hairy roots, seedlings, and cell
Madrid & Corchete, 2010). Biological elicitors have suspensions (Kaimoyo er al., 2008). Similarly, magnetic ﬁelds
been reported to be very effective to this purpose were effective in inducing accumulation of secondary metab—
(Galletti, De Lorenzo, & Ferrari, 2009); they can be de— olites in transformed callus of Ammi majus, a rich source of
rived from other organisms such as fungi, bacteria, Viruses coumarins, furanocoumarins and corresponding glycosides
or herbivores, and include plant—derived chemicals that are and of stress—related compounds in Spirodela oligorrhiza,
released at the attack site or accumulate systemically upon a promising biological cell factory (Ben—Izhak Monselise,
pathogen or herbivore attack. Pathogen—secreted hydrolytic Parola, & Kost, 2003; Krolicka et al., 2006).
enzymes that degrade host cell wall polymers, i.e. endopo—
lygalacturonases (PGs; EC 3.2.1.15), are also able to in— Encapsulation procedures
duce defense responses in plants and their involvement Immobilization techniques contribute to a considerable
has been demonstrated in many pathosystems (Ferrari increase in the number of plant cell cultures’ applications
et al., 2008). PGs are not directly responsible for the in— for the production of compounds with a high added value.
duction of plant defense responses, but rather catalyze Immobilization is a technique allowing the entrapment of
the release of the true elicitors, oligogalacturonides catalytically active cells on a ﬁxed support, preventing
(OGs, oc—1,4—D—galactosyluronic acid oligomers) with a de— the formation of suspension cultures. Most usually
gree of polymerization (DP) between 10 and 15. The ad— exploited matrices are gels or polymers, which may include
vantage of OGs over Chemical elicitors is that these calcium alginate, agar, agarose, gelatin and carrageenan;
molecules, derived from plant pectins, are completely alternative supports include polyurethane foam and hollow
safe for human consumption and for the environment. ﬁber membranes. The immobilized cells are able to main—
They are produced after digestion of pectin, which is eas— tain prolonged Viability and biosynthetic capability with
ily obtained from fruit peels and other waste products. EX— high rates of secondary metabolite production (Shilpa,
tracted pectin (E440) with worldwide production estimated Varun, & Lakshmi, 2010). Accumulation levels of plumba—
at 35,000 tonnes a year is currently widely used additive as gin were dramatically increased in Plumbago rosea cultures
gelling agents in jams, confectionary and bakery ﬁllings, immobilized in calcium alginate in the presence or absence
and stabilizers in yoghurts and milk drinks. OGs should of combined treatments of chitosan (Komaraiah,
have equivalent safety features, moreover, can be easily Ramakrishna, Reddanna, & KaVikishore, 2003). The recent
prepared by controlled hydrolysis (thermal or enzymatic) reView from Smetanska (2008) mentioned a set of success—
of polygalacturonic acid (PGA), a by—product of the food fully produced metabolites in immobilized plant cells.
industry. Since an essential requisite for the use of elicitors Enhanced production of secondary metabolites could
in a large—scale production of secondary metabolites from also be obtained through algae immobilization procedures.
plant cell cultures is the availability of a cost—effective Also in this case, the algae are encapsulated in polymers
elicitor, we investigated and deﬁned a modiﬁed version like agar, agarose, calcium alginate, and carrageenan.
of the protocol described by Spiro et al. (1993), able to re— This procedure allows cell Viability in the stationary pro—
duce the time and costs associated with the production and ducing phase to be extended enabling maintenance of bio—
puriﬁcation of OGs. In large—scale preparation, digestion mass over a prolonged period (Leonard et al., 2011).
times and enzyme concentration were strongly reduced, Continuous production of astaxanthin, a fat—soluble
producing preparations with an enrichment in OGs inter— carotenoid pigment used as antioxidant particularly in sport
mediate with DP 8—12, as determined by MALDI—ToF stress, has been investigated by immobilization of living

"
"8","360 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366
microalgae within porous transparent silica matrix. The ad— overcoming the main disadvantages of current fusion protein
vantage of this production system versus the free cell cul— technologies, like incomplete cleavage products and/or the
tures based approach is the possibility for continuous requirement of expensive proteases. Furthermore, introduc—
astaxanthin production with no necessity of cells destruc— tion of the fusion construct into psbA—deletion mutants en—
tion for its extraction (Fiedler, Hager, Franke, Soltmann, abled transgenic photosynthetic algae to be obtain and
& Boettcher, 2007). select them by autotrophic growth. Transgenic photosyn—

In agreement with other authors we found that most of thetic algae have been obtained without the help of antibiotic
the metabolic activities seem to be enhanced when immo— resistance genes with the result of setting up a marker—gene—
bilized species are used, probably due to a concentration ef— free transgenic approach and avoid any consumer’s concern
feet of cells in close proximity coupled with the protective about the transfer of marker genes from a food product into
effect of the matrix, as suggested by Tripathi, Ramachandra the cells of the body or to bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract
Rao, & RaVishankar (2002). (Johanningmeier & Fischer, 2010).

Promising preliminary results have also been obtained

A pioneer study: C. reinhardtii engineering by treating different strains of C. reinhardtii with different

Over the last decades, great advances in genetic engi— types of elicitations, e.g. OGs, UV—C irradiation or a combi—
neering technologies involving algae have been achieved. nation of various stresses as heat and high light (Table 2).
Biotechnology companies now apply these techniques to This approach included elucidation of the molecular mech—
alter metabolic pathways and eXpress valuable proteins in anisms of the biosynthesis of photosynthetic antioxidant
different cell compartments. Particularly the eukaryotic compounds (e.g. xanthophylls and plastoquinones) with
alga C . reinhardtii has been widely used as a model organ— the aim of developing a rational metabolic engineering
ism; its complete genome sequence is known, databases are method for their overproduction (unpublished data). As a
available for any searching or cloning requirements and result of the applied elicitation, a higher yield of B—Carotene,
successful high level expression of recombinant proteins a Vitamin A precursor well known as a free radicals scaven—
in the Chloroplast compartment has been recently obtained ger, was induced as well as higher production (up to 20—
(Galvan, Gonzalez—Ballester, & Fernandez, 2007). fold increase) of lutein and zeaxanthin, the so—called macular

Physiologically active peptides derived from plant and pigments recognized as eye protectors, was observed. These
animal proteins represent potential health enhancing com— results strengthen the possibility to use this unicellular alga as
ponents for food applications (Erdmann, Cheung, & a biological farm (Rea et al., 2010).
Schroder, 2008; Hartmann & Meisel, 2007). In order to
take advantage of these beneﬁcial effects, algal strains of Selection by metabolite profile analyses
C . reinhardtii expressing different antimicrobial and anti— Analytical phytochemical determination is an inherently
oxidant peptides were generated. Exploiting the “biotech— difﬁcult task due to the huge natural structural heterogene—
nological” properties of this alga, Nutra—Snack research ity of secondary metabolites, but also, to the rapidly occur—
developed a speciﬁc and innovative approach involving ring changes in their isoforms and accumulation levels in
the fusion of a useful peptide to the D1 protein of PSII. response to environmental Changes. A part the eXistence
D1 is a hydrophobic polypeptide intimately associated of a vast number of unknown compounds, Chemical hetero—
with its homologous sister protein D2 and various cofactors geneity may account for the currently lack of an analytical
in the reaction center of PSII. Even under normal light con— platform allowing a comprehensive metabolite analysis
ditions, D1 is the protein with the highest turnover rate in required by an “—omics” approach (Seger & Sturm, 2007).
the Chloroplast which could be further increased under Secondary metabolites usually represent a very small
any type of stress (Edelman & Mattoo, 2008). Synthesis fraction of the whole sample under investigation, and pre—
of valuable peptides coupled with D1 protein was achieved treatments such as Clean—up and/or pre—concentration are
within the green algae C . reinhardtii. By an accurate process— required to make their identiﬁcation possible. Analytical
ing performed by the CtpA protease (Roose&Pakrasi, 2004) techniques such as gas Chromatography (GC) and high—
was possible to obtain small peptides, of eight residues in performance liquid Chromatography (HPLC) with UV and/
size.Severa1advantages can be envisaged in the attachment or mass spectrometry (MS) detection represent the most
of foreign peptides to the D1 protein, instead of just produc— trustworthy and common methods used to monitor the pres—
ing them directly. Coupling a peptide directly to the highly ence of secondary metabolites. While GC—MS is particu—
expressed protein allowed an equally high production of larly appropriate for the analysis of volatile organic
the foreign peptide. That avoided the complicated introduc— compounds and derivatized primary and secondary metabo—
tion of regulatory elements of the gene to be expressed by eX— lites, LC—MS is highly applicable to the analysis of a wide
ploiting those of the prA gene. Moreover, the production range of semi—polar compounds including many secondary
rate of the fused protein can be modulated by light intensity metabolites with nutraceutical proprieties (Allwood &
and the foreign protein can be precisely “cut—to—size” by the Goodacre, 2009). The improvements in liquid chromatogra—
endogenous CtpA protease. The accurate trimming of the phy techniques strongly boosted the efﬁciency of separation
fused partner made further in vitro processing unnecessary, and decreased the analysis time of complex biological

"
"9","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 353—366 361
UV—C Detrimental to PSII Germicidal lamp; Peak at 254 nm 4- and 3—fold increase of Lutein and B-Carotene
apparatus —> impaired Temperature: 25 0C respectively in D1 mutants.
electron transport capacity Times: 0, 30, 90, 180 min
and damaged protein subunits Strains: |L, D1-A250R and D1-S264K
OGs Fragments with a degree of Light intensity: 50 umol m‘2 s‘1 Strong increase of all analyzed photosynthetic
polymerization between Temperature: 25 0C pigments after 8 h treatment.
10 and 15 elicit a variety of Times: 0, 3, 8, 24, 48 h
defense responses including [06]: 800 ug/ml (4 h dig.)
ROS accumulation Strains: cw15
SNP SNP releases nitric oxide Light intensity: 50 umol m‘2 s‘1 No Changes in any analyzed photosynthetic pigments.
that functions as a bioactive Temperature: 25 OC
molecule for adaptive responses Times: 0, 2, 4, 6, 24, 48 h
of plant fitness to environmental [SNP]: 1.5 mM
constraints Strains: |L
HL/HT Stimulation of production of Light intensity: 1000 umol m‘2 s‘1 20-fold increase of Zeaxanthin after
antioxidant photosynthetic Temperature: 37 0C 90 min treatment in IL strain.
compounds reducing Times: 0,15, 30, 90 min
harmful radical effects Strains: |L, D1-A250R and D1-S264K
Light intensity: 2000 umol m‘2 s‘1 20-fold increase of Zeaxanthin after
Temperature: 50 0C 30 min treatment in IL;
Times: 0, 30 min 2-fold increase of Zeaxanthin after
Strains: |L, CC125 and npq2/lor1 30 min treatment in npq2/lor1;
3—fold increase of B-Carotene after
30 min treatment in npq2/lor1
deficient strain; CC125, wild-type (www.chlamy.org); npq2/lor1, double mutant of non-photochemical quenching lacking the lutein, loroxanthin
and all zeaxanthin-derived xanthophylls (Anwaruzzaman et al., 2004). 06s — oligogalacturonides, SNP — sodium nitroprusside, HL/HT — high
light/high temperature.
matrices, contributing to the standardization of plant—based the synthesis of polyphenols in samples coming from ﬁeld
drugs, Classiﬁcation of plant material, and creation of new plants, in vitro plants, callus tissues and cell suspension cul—
plant—based medicines. HPLC has been the main technique tures, indicating that under in vitro conditions, the metabo—
in phytochemical analysis for decades, recently, develop— lism of phenolics undergoes a fundamental Change.
ments in the separation sciences lead to the advent of ultra Rosmarinic acid was detected in huge amounts in all the
high—performance liquid chromatography (UPLC)—MS im— analyzed samples. On the contrary, ﬂavonoids and phenolic
proving resolution of metabolite species and precision of acids occurred mainly in plant tissues coming from ﬁeld
mass measurements (Miyamoto et al., 2008). cultivation and not in extracts deriving from in vitro cultur—
Sophisticated analytical protocols were deﬁned and ap— ing (Krzyzanowska et al., 2011). Furthermore, in our study,
plied throughout our approach for the bioprocess chain to the concentrations of four major groups of antioxidant phe—
determine and quantify metabolite composition of plants nolics (phenolic acids, Clovamids, ﬂavonoids, and isoﬂa—
for high—producing line selection; to identify important vones) have been investigated in 57 different Trifolium
steps during the culture growth and select the right culture species. The latter represent valid alternative to the cur—
developmental stage for harvest and extraction of metabo— rently exploited soybean and red Clover plants for the in—
lite. In particular, monitoring levels of metabolites in the dustrial production of phenolics. The Cluster analysis of
course of plant culture development and establishment experimental data allowed to identify a number of species
was an essential pre—requisite for production of healthy having extremely high levels of phenolics (up to 7—9%
food, as in vitro methods and/or elicitation can lead to the of dried weight) and in some cases containing all four
accumulation of unhealthy compounds. So, to control groups of the analyzed phenolics (Oleszek et al., 2007).
planned and unintended Changes in metabolite proﬁling, LC—DAD—ESI—MS screening was carried out on in vitro
several analytes in parallel have been detected by different and in vivo plant material settled up by our team to evaluate
Chromatographic methods, including HPLC, UPLC, LC the production of antioxidant substances in Echinacea spe—
with different detection systems (DAD—MS—MS), and their Cies. The main achievements were the in vitro production of
shifting patterns analyzed. As an example, the UPLC E. angustifolia plantlets from adult plants and the develop—
triple—quadrupole—MS proﬁles of M entha longifolia and ment of the proper multiplication procedures to obtain plant
M. piperita extracts revealed considerable differences in biomass able to produce active compounds. Signiﬁcantly,

"
"10","362 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366
the accumulation of caffeic acid derivatives and alkamides produced in vitro after testing the general antioxidant propri—
in in vitro regenerated shoots of E . angustifolia adult plants eties of the selected extracts.
was reported for the ﬁrst time (Lucchesini et al., 2009). The evaluation of the antioxidant power of plant metab—
olite extracts as well as of their corresponding synthetic
Industrial production of plant valuable compounds compounds, was performed by the DPPH and ABT S assays
Safe extraction protocols which rely on the capability of the antioxidant to scavenge
Food processing has always used solvent or water eX- these free radicals. This property is quantitatively described
traction, liquid—liquid extraction and leaching to isolate by the concentration of antioxidant needed to scavenge 50%
target component from the parent source. Currently, en— of either DPPH or ABTS+,which is referred to as the IC50. In
hanced consumer awareness of food quality and safety the Trolox Equivalent Antioxidant Capacity (TEAC) test, the
boosted stricter regulations regarding the use of organic sol— ratio between the 1C50 of TrolOX and the IC50 of the tested an—
vent (e.g. hexane) and their residual level. This encouraged tioxidant, scavenging the same radical, is often used to com—
researchers of natural product industries to ﬁnd alternative pare antioxidant capacities (Tang & Liu, 2007). To evaluate
“green” technologies for the isolation of active ingredients. cell damage and protection, we treated ﬁbroblast cultures
An intriguing possibility is replacement of the traditional with oxidant agents in the presence or absence of M . longifo-
organic solvent based extraction technique with more enVi— Zia extracts. The results showed that mint extracts signiﬁ—
ronmentally friendly solvents like carbon dioxide (C02), cantly preserved cellular Viability, limited protein and DNA
ethanol and water. damages, decreased lipid peroxidation and maintained high
In this nutrition context, different extraction procedures expression levels of glutathione and superoxide dismutase
avoiding solvents not compatible with human health were actiVities during the ﬁrst phases of oxidative stress induction
set up, according to the particular metabolite under study. (Berselli er al., 2010),
Interestingly, the best solvent for extraction of phytochem— Finally, a new functional food in the form of a snack bar
icals was found to be water which exhaustively extracted all containing plant cell—derived antioxidant extracts was pro—
hydrophilic active principles. However, supercritical ﬂuid duced according to the strategy of the Zone diet. The Zone
extraction (SFE) technology has also been considered to in— diet proposes a healthy lifestyle combined to correct nutrition
crease product yield and quality. and food supplementation, rather than simply weight loss. It
Pressurized liquid C02 technology is one of the fastest is based on an accurate balance ratio of carbohydrates (40%),
growing new process technologies adopted by the food, fats (30%) and proteins (30%) uptake whiCh allows to
pharmaceutical and nutraceutical industries. C02 is non— achieve a hormonal balance controlling the body’s insulin
toxic, non—ﬂammable, odorless, tasteless, inert, and ineX— and glucagon production. The snack was tested in a speciﬁc
pensive and its critical temperature is just above room tem- target group of athletes, in which physical activity raised the
peratures. SFE technology by C02 can improve products level of free radicals in blood. The assays performed on hu—
standardizing concentration of active ingredients and in— man blood serumincluded the d—ROMs (reactive oxygen me—
creasing yields, purity and quality compared to conven— tabolites) test, that determines its oxidative status by
tional chemical engineering unit operations, such as measuring the concentration of hydroperoxides generated
liquid/liquid extraction, distillation, mechanical microniza— by the oxidation of different organic substrates, and the
tion, liquid and/or gas phase reactions. For these reasons BAP test, which evaluates the antioxidant potential of blood
SFE is commonly used today for decaffeination of coffee plasma by measuring its ferric reducing ability. Results are
and tea, essential oils ﬂavors and spices extractions under industrial intellectual properties agreement (see:
(KhosraVi—Darani, 2010; Tang, Li, LV, & Jiang, 2010). www.enerkid.org and www.nutrasnack.it).
Toxicity and functionality controls Biosensors for quality controls
Functional foods need to be evaluated, both from the In the agro food sector, food safety has emerged as a ma—
toxicological point of View and for their biological efﬁcacy, jor concern because of its signiﬁcant impact on public
before their application in human trials. health and economy. Foodborne disease resulting from un—
In vitro cell cultures are a valuable tool to assess cytotox— intentional contamination also has a strong negative impact
icity and cellular responses to natural antioxidants present in on food industry economy. Furthermore, the emerging
plant—derived functional foods (Rao, Geethangili, Fang, & functional food industry has placed on the market novel
Tzeng, 2007). On one hand, the determination of their toxic— food enriched of plant compounds acting in promoting hu—
ity can be used as a tool to deﬁne the concentrations at which man well—being, but several products often show scarce
protective effects can be further characterized; on the other functionality and sometimes even unhealthy properties
hand, the cell cultures can be treated with subtoxic concentra— and epidemiological studies are necessary to prove their
tions of the antioxidant compounds to identify new cellular real promotion of good health. These factors result in an
responses, among those mechanisms of potential stress pre— increased demand for risk assessment and prompt the reg—
Vention (Glei er al., 2003). Our research analyzed changesin— ulatory agencies to update legislation aimed at controlling
duced in speciﬁc cellular targets by the functional ingredients food and environment contaminations. Food quality control

"
"11","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (207 7) 353—366 363
deals with all aspects of food quality and safety from food ﬁrst time in the literature, by entrapment into the nanocom—
purchase, storage, transportation, processing and distribu— posite ﬁlm during the electrodeposition process from mul—
tion. It aims at providing basic and practical information tiwall carbon nanotubes—Chitosan solution. The sensitiVity
on food Characteristics and safety controls to ensure that of the developed biosensor was three to ﬁve orders higher
food supplies are non—toxic, of good quality and can con— than that reported in recent publications for the detection
tribute to an acceptable nutritional and health status of of micromolar concentration of the standards polyphenols
the populations. This scenario requires the challenging caffeic, chlorogenic, gallic and rosmarinic acids
development of sensitive control analytical systems to mea— (Diaconu, Litescu & Radua, 2010). Several electrochemical
sure the content, quality and activity of the complex food devices were developed for the assessment of the antioxi—
matriX and to reveal the presence of possible threats such dant capacity (onC) based on superoxide radicals (0;)
as presence of pesticides and heavy metals. Properly assem— scavenging ability. First, biosensors with covalent immobi—
bled biosensors can satisfy these requirements, providing lization of both xanthine oxidase (XOD) and cytochrome C
also reliability and ﬂexibility of the assays. Biosensor tech— on modiﬁed gold electrodes have been successfully used for
nology is a rapidly expanding ﬁeld spanning a broad spec— the determination of onC of garlic samples (Cortina—Puig,
trum of applications including biomedical diagnosis, Muﬁoz—Berbel, Calas—Blanchard, & Marty, 2009). Subse—
environmental monitoring, veterinary and more recently, quently, a monoenzymatic XOD—based biosensor whose de—
screening of food and agricultural products. Biosensors tection concerns the H202 produced by spontaneous
are analytical devices, based on the intimate contact be— dismutation of O; was developed (Cortina—Puig er al.,
tween a biorecognition element that interacts with the ana— 2010). The newly developed biosensors represent appealing
lyte of interest and a transducer element that converts the analytical tools based on biological recognition elements
biorecognition event into a measurable signal. Compared able to cope with the complexity of nutraceutical food ma—
to the Classical analytical techniques they combine high se— triX measuring the content, and activity of the functional
lectiVity and sensitiVity to low instrumentation cost, ease of metabolite and the safety of the ﬁnal product.
use and rapidity of the assay. Biosensor systems differ from
the standard analytical Chemistry techniques especially in Conclusions
terms of environmental friendliness. They are miniaturized The Nutra—Snack project provided and demonstrated the
instruments using a few (up to tenths) of microliters of most suitable biotechnologies and biochemical methods for
buffer reagents that are not solvents dangerous for the enVi— large—scale production of a ready—to—eat food containing
ronment neither for human health. They need an extremely plant—derived compounds with radical—scavenging proper—
low power to be operated. Their functioning is based on ties. In vitro plant cell culture systems are just entering
properties of sensing biologic elements that are completely the industrial manufacturing facilities as efﬁcient, enViron—
natural, such as the photosynthetic organisms and their eX— mentally friendly and safe sources of biofarms. Safety
tracts isolated from algae and higher plants. They use a re— issues related to the in vitro growth process were addressed
newable raw material, not synthetically produced, by our research program; its innovative approach estab—
biodegradable and easy to dispose. lished culture conditions and Chemical compounds and/or

Innovative biosensors were developed in the Nutra— elicitations compatible with human nutrition. This aspect
Snack program which exploited the biochemical proprieties considers not only the source of the biological elicitors,
of active and recombinant enzymes. These biosensors were but also the Chemical composition of the growth and main—
build up to control the radical—scavenging capacity of taining media utilized in most plant cells and in vitro cul—
extracts enriched in secondary metabolites; food products tures. A complete real—time in Sim quality control system,
containing extracts enriched in secondary metabolites; ultimately validated with Clinical trials, was suggested
large—scale in vitro cultures during the synthesis of second— and set up to assess the functionality and safety of the pro—
ary metabolites in bioreactors, and blood serum of subjects duced snacks, which includes the use of biosensors for the
consuming the new functional food. Amperometric biosen— detection of antioxidant metabolites. Future applications of
sors based on the polyphenoloxidases Laccase [EC this type of biosensors are envisaged for direct medical
1.10.3.2] and Tyrosinase [EC 1.14.18.1] have been fabri— screening by monitoring metabolite content in human
cated to analyze both the extract antioxidant activity and blood. Innovative research on C . reinhardtii cultures shed
the content of phenolics (Litescu, Eremia, Bertoli, light on its future exploitation as biological farms for the
Pistelli, & Radu, 2010). Our aim was the development of production of antioxidant peptides and photosynthetic—
food quality control methods reliable and suitable for in derived metabolites against UV and blue light, protecting
Sim or ﬁeld analyses. In particular, Laccase from Trametes the retina and lens from damage associated with macular
versicolor, was successfully exploited as a biorecognition degeneration, cataracts, glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy.
element in order to develop a biosensor for total content C . reinhardtii belongs to a category of organisms with
evaluation of phenolic metabolites from different species a GRAS status (generally Regarded és §afe) granted by
of Salvia ofﬁcinalis and M. piperita in vitro cultivated the FDA. Apart from being easily transformable, transgenic
plants. The enzyme immobilization was achieved, for the strains can be obtained in few days and production volumes

"
"12","364 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 353—366

Within a few weeks in full containment. Consequently, fur— United States, 2000—2009. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality

ther research in this area appears to yield promising results Week/X Report 59(35), “25—1 130'

. . . . . . Cortma—Pung, M., Munoz-Berbel, X., Calas-Blanchard, C., &

concernlng the enhancement of ant10x1dat1ve and antlml— M . . .

, _ _ _ _ arty, J. L. (2009). Electrochemical Characterization of a superox-
Cl‘Oblal defense through d1etary supplementatlon Wlth edl' ide biosensor based on the CO-immobilization of cytochrome C and
ble IllltI‘aCClltiCal algae. XOD on SAM-modified gold electrodes and application to garlic

The biotechnologies presented in this review With recent samples. Ta/anta, 79(2), 289—294.

literature papers are important contributions to food security, cort'm'PU'g' M"" Scangas, A' C' H"" MarChese' Z' 5"" Andreescu, 5""

. . . Marty, J.-L., & Calas-Blanchard, C. (2010). Development of a xan-

economlc development and conservatlon 0f the enV1r0nment. . . . . . .

_ _ _ _ _ thme oxndase modified amperometrlc electrode for the determina-

The future 0f fOOd W111 be 1ncreas1ng1y concerned Wlth hOW 1t tion of the antioxidant capacity. Electroanalysis, 22(20), 2429—2433.

affects our health and well—being and everyday food products Dauvillee, D., Hilbig, L., Preiss, 8., & Johanningmeier, U. (2004).

will be regarded as part of disease prevention. Minimal extent Of sequence homology required for homologous

recombination at the psbA locus in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
chloroplasts using PCR-generated DNA fragments. Photosynthesis

Acknowledgments Research, 79, 219—224.

This work was supported by the European Community Diaconu, M., Litescu, S.'C., & Radua, G. L. (2010). Laccase—
grant EU N. FOOD—CT—2005—023044. MWCNT—Chltosan blosehsor. A new) tool for total polyphenohc
content evaluation from In Vitro cultivated plants. Sensors and
Actuators B: Chemical, 145(2), 800—806.
References Edelman, M., & Matteo, A. (2008). D1-protein dynamics on photo-
system II: the lingering enigma. Photosynthesis Research, 98,

Allwood, J. W., & Goodacre, R. (2010). An introduction to liquid 609—620.

Chromatography—mass spectrometry instrumentation applied in Erdmann, K., Cheung, B. W., & Schréder, H. J. (2008). The possible
plant metabolomic analyses. Phytochemical Analysis, 21, 33—47. roles of food-derived bioactive peptides in reducing the risk of

Ariga, T., & Seki, T. (2006). Antithrombotic and anticancer effects of cardiovascular disease. The journal of Nutritional Biochemistry,
garliC-derived sulfur compounds: a review. BioFactors, 26(2), 19(10), 643—654.

93—103. Ferrari, S., Galletti, R., Pontiggia, D., Manfredini, C., Lionetti, V.,

Anwaruzzaman, M., Chin, B. L., Li, X. P., Lohr, M., Martinez, D. A., & Bellincampi, D., et al. (2008). Transgenic expression of a fungal
Niyogi, K. K. (2004). Genomic analysis of mutants affecting xan- endo—polygalacturonase increases plant resistance to pathogens
thophyll biosynthesis and regulation of photosynthetic light har— and reduces auxin sensitivity. Plant Physiology, 146, 669—681.
vesting in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Photosynthesis Research, Fiedler, D., Hager, U., Franke, H., Soltmann, U., & Boettcher, H.
82(3), 265—276. (2007). Algae biocers: astaxanthin formation in sol-gel immobilised

Badimon, L., Vilahur, (3., & Padre, T. (2010). Nutraceuticals and ath— living microalgae. journal of Materials Chemistry, 17, 261.
erosclerosis: human trials. Cardiovascular Therapeutics, 28(4), Galletti, R., De Lorenzo, (3., & Ferrari, S. (2009). Host-derived signals ac-
202—215. tivate plant innate immunity. PlantSigna/ing& Behavior, 4(1), 33—34.

Ben-Izhak Monselise, E., Parola, A. H., & Kost, D. (2003). Low-fre- Galvén, A., Gonzélez-Ballester, D., & Fernéndez, E. (2007). Insertional
quency electromagnetic fields induce a stress effect upon higher mutagenesis as a tool to study genes/functions in Chlamydomonas.
plants, as evident by the universal stress signal, alanine. Bio— Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 616, 77—89.
Chemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 302(2), Georgiev, M. |., Weber, J., & Maciuk, A. (2009). Bioprocessing of plant
427—434. cell cultures for mass production of targeted compounds. Applied

Berselli, P. V., Zava, S., Montorfano, (3., Corsetto, P. A., Krzyzanowska, J., Microbiology and Biotechnology, 83(5), 809—823.

Oleszek, W., et al. (2010). A mint purified extract protects human Glei, M., Matuschek, M., Steiner, C., Béhm, V., Persin, C., & Pool-
keratinocytes from short-term, Chemically induced oxidative stress. Zobel, B. L. (2003). Initial in vitro toxicity testing of functional
lournalongricu/turaland Food Chemistry. (Epub ahead of print). foods rich in catechins and anthocyanins in human cells. Toxi—

Bertoli, A., Giovannini, A., Ruffoni, B., Guardo, A. D., Spinelli, (3., cology in Vitro: an Internationallournal Published in Association
Mazzetti, M., et al. (2008). Bioactive constituent production in with BIBRA, 17, 723—729.

St. John’s Wort in vitro hairy roots. Regenerated plant lines. journal Hartmann, R., & Meisel, H. (2007). Food-derived peptides with bio-
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56, 5078—5082. logical activity: from research to food applications. Current Opin—

Bhosale, P. (2004). Environmental and cultural stimulants in the pro— ion in Biotechnology, 18, 163—169.
duction of carotenoids from microorganisms. Applied Microbiol— Ionkova, |. (2009). Effect of methyl jasmonate on production of aril-
ogy and Biotechnology, 63(4), 351—361. tetralin lignans in hairy root cultures of Linum tauricum. Pharma—

Bone, R. A., & Landrum, J. T. (2010). Dose-dependent response of cognosy Research, 1, 102—105.
serum lutein and macular pigment optical density to supplemen— Johanningmeier, U., & Fischer, D. (2010). Perspective for the use of
tation with lutein esters. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, genetic transformants in order to enhance the synthesis of the de-
504(1), 50—55. sired metabolites: engineering chloroplasts of microalgae for the

Cai, Y., Wang, R., Pei, F., & Liang, B.-B. (2007). Antibacterial activity of production of bioactive compounds. In M. T. Giardi, G. Rea, &
allicin alone and in combination with bold beta—lactams against B. Berra (Eds), Bio—farms for nutraceuticals: functional food and
Staphylococcus spp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The journal of safety control by biosensors (pp. 144—151). LANDES BioScience
Antibiotics, 60, 335—338. and Springer Publisher.

Caputi, L., & Aprea, E. (2011). Use of terpenoids as natural flavouring Kaimoyo, E., Farag, M. A., Sumner, L. W., Wasmann, C., Cuello, J. L.,
compounds in food industry. Recent Patents on Food, Nutrition & & VanEtten, H. (2008). Sub-lethal levels ofelectric current elicitthe
Agriculture, 3(1), 9—16. biosynthesis of plant secondary metabolites. Biotechnology Prog—

Cataldi, A. (2010). Cell responses to oxidative stressors. Current ress, 24(2), 377—384.

Pharmaceutical Design, 16(12), 1387—1395. Khosravi-Darani, K. (2010). Research activities on supercritical fluid

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2010). State-spe- science in food biotechnology. Critical Reviews in Food Science
cific trends in fruit and vegetable consumption among adults, and Nutrition, 50(6), 479—488.

"
"13","G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 353—366 365

Knasmijller, S., Nersesyan, A., Misfk, M., Gerner, C., Mikulits, W., Raederstorff, D. (2009). Antioxidant activity of olive polyphenols in
Ehrlich, V., et al. (2008). Use of conventional and -omics based humans: a review. Internationallournal for Vitamin and Nutrition
methods for health Claims of dietary antioxidants: a critical over— Research, 79(3), 152—165.
view. The British journal of Nutrition, 99(1), ES3—52. Rao, Y. K., Geethangili, M., Fang, S. H., & Tzeng, Y. M. (2007). Anti-

Komaraiah, P., Ramakrishna, S. V., Reddanna, P., & Kavikishore, P. B. oxidant and cytotoxic activities of naturally occurring phenolic and
(2003). Enhanced production of plumbagin in immobilized cells of related compounds: a comparative study. Food and Chemical
Plumbago rosea by elicitation and in situ adsorption. journal of Toxicology, 45(9), 1770—1776.

Biotechnology, 10, 181—187. Rea, (3., Antonacci, A., Lambreva, M., Margonelli, A., Ambrosi, C., &

Krolicka, A., Kartanowicz, R., Wosinski, S. A., Szpitter, A., Giardi, M. T. (2010). The Nutra—Snack project: basic research and
Kaminski, M., & Lojkowska, E. (2006). Induction of secondary biotechnological programs on nutraceutics. In M. T. Giardi,
metabolite production in transformed callus of Ammi majus L. G. Rea, & B. Berra (Eds.), Bio—farms for nutraceuticals: functional
grown after electromagnetic treatment of the culture medium. food and safety control by biosensors (pp. 1—16). LANDES Bio-
Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 39, 1386—1391. Science and Springer Publisher.

Krzyzanowska, J., Czubacka, A., Janda, B., Pecio, L., Przybys, M., Reinbothe, C., Springer, A., Samol, |., & Reinbothe, S. (2009). Plant
Doroszewska, et al. (2011). Determination of polyphenols in oxylipins: role of jasmonic acid during programmed cell death,
Mentha longifolia and M. piperita field grown and in vitro plant defence and leaf senescence. The FEBS journal, 276(17),
samples using UPLC-TQ-MS. journal ofAOAC International, 94(1), 4666—4681.

43—50. Reuter, S., Gupta, S. C., Chaturvedi, M. M., & Aggarwal, B. B. (2010).

Lee, E. K., Jin, Y. W., Park, J. H., Yoo, Y. M., Hong, S. M., Amir, R., et al. Oxidative stress, inflammation, and cancer: how are they linked?
(2010). Cultured cambial meristematic cells as a source of plant Free Radical Biology & Medicine, 49(11), 1603—1616.
natural products. Nature Biotechnology, 28(11), 1213—1217. Roose, J. L., & Pakrasi, H. B. (2004). Evidence that D1 processing is

Leonard, A., Dandoy, P., Danloy, E., Leroux, (3., Meunier, C. F., required for manganese binding and extrinsic protein assembly
Rooke, J. C., et al. (2011). Whole-cell based hybrid materials for into photosystem II. The journal of Biological Chemistry, 279,
green energy production, environmental remediation and smart 45417—45422.
cell-therapy. Chemical Society Reviews, 40(2), 860—885. Rudkowska, |. (2010). Plant sterols and stanols for healthy ageing.

Leonard, E., Ajikumar, P. K., Thayer, K., Xiao, W. H., Mo, J. D., Maturitas, 66(2), 158—162.

Tidor, B., et al. (2010). Combining metabolic and protein engi- Ruffoni, B., Pistelli, L., Bertoli, A., & Pistelli, L. (2010). Plant cell cul-
neering of a terpenoid biosynthetic pathway for overproduction tures: bioreactors for industrial production. In M. T. Giardi, G. Rea,
and selectivity control. Proceedings of the National Academy of & B. Berra (Eds.), Bio—farms for nutraceuticals: functional food and
Sciences of the United States of America, 107(31), safety control by biosensors (pp. 203—221). LANDES BioScience

13654—13659. and Springer Publisher.

Litescu, S. C., Eremia, S., Bertoli, A., Pistelli, L., & Radu, G. L. (2010). Scholle, J. M., Baker, W. L., Talati, R., & Coleman, C. |. (2009). The
Laccase-nafion based biosensor for the determination of polyphe- effect of adding plant sterols or stanols to statin therapy in hy-
nolic secondary metabolites. Analytical Letters, 43(7—8), percholesterolemic patients: systematic review and meta-analy-
1089—1099. sis. journal of the American College of Nutrition, 28(5),

Lucchesini, M., Bertoli, A., Mensuali-Sodic, A., & Pistelli, L. (2009). 517—524.

Establishment of in vitrotissue cultures from Echinacea angustifolia Seger, C., & Sturm, S. J. (2007). Analytical aspects of plant metabolite
D.C. adult plants for the production of phytochemical compounds. profiling platforms: current standings and future aims. journal of
Scientia Horticulturae, 122(3), 484—490. Proteome Research, 6(2), 480—497.

Madrid, E., & Corchete, P. (2010). Silymarin secretion and its elicita— Shi, M., Kwok, K. W., & Wu, J. Y. (2007). Enhancement of tanshinone
tion by methyl jasmonate in cell cultures of Silybum marianum is production in Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge (red or Chinese sage)
mediated by phospholipase D-phosphatidic acid. journal of hairy-root culture by hyperosmotic stress and yeast elicitor. Bio—
Experimental Botany, 61(3), 747—754. technology and Applied Biochemistry, 46(4), 191—196.

Mehrotra, S., Rahman, L. U., & Kukreja, A. K. (2010). An extensive Shilpa, K., Varun, K., & Lakshmi, B. S. (2010). An alternate method
case study of hairy-root cultures for enhanced secondary- of natural drug production: eliciting secondary metabolite pro-
metabolite production through metaboliC-pathway engineering. duction using plant cell culture. journal of Plant Sciences, 5(3),
Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry, 56(4), 161 —1 72. 222—247.

Mishra, B. N., & Ranjan, R. (2008). Growth of hairy-root cultures in Smetanska, |. (2008). Production of secondary metabolites using plant
various bioreactors for the production of secondary metabolites. cell cultures. Advances in Biochemical Engineering/biotechnology,
Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry, 49(1), 1—10. 111, 187—228.

Miyamoto, K., Hara, T., Kobayashi, H., Morisaka, H., Tokuda, D., Spiro, M. D., Kates, K. A., Keller, A. L., O’Neill, M. A., Albersheim, P.,
Horie, K., et al. (2008). High-efficiency liquid Chromatographic & Darvill, A. G. (1993). Purification and Characterization of bio-
separation utilizing long monolithic silica capillary columns. An— logically active (1—4)-linked-d-Oligogalacturonides after partial
alytical Chemistry, 80(22), 8741—8750. digestion of polygalacturonic acid with endopolygalacturonase.

Oksman—Caldentey, K. M., & Inzé, D. (2004). Plant cell factories in the Carbohydrate Research, 247, 9—20.
post-genomic era: new ways to produce designer secondary me- Tang, W. Q., Li, D. C., Lv, Y. X., & Jiang, J. G. (2010). Extraction and
tabolites. Trends in Plant Science, 9, 433—440. removal of caffeine from green tea by ultrasoniC-enhanced super-

Oleszek, W., Stochmal, A., & Janda, B. (2007). Concentration of iso— critical fluid. journal of Food Science, 75(4), C363—C368.
flavones and other phenolics in the aerial parts of Trifolium spe- Tang, Y. Z., & Liu, Z. Q. (2007). Free-radical-scavenging effect of
Cies. journal ongricultural and Food Chemistry, 55, 8095—8100. carbazole derivatives on AAPH-induced hemolysis of human

Peterson, C. E., Sedjo, R. L., Davis, F. (3., Beam, C. A., & erythrocytes. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry, 15(5),

Giuliano, A. R. (2010). Combined antioxidant carotenoids and the 1903—1913.
risk of persistent human papillomavirus infection. Nutrition and Tripathi, U., Ramachandra Rao, 8., & Ravishankar, G. A. (2002). Bio-
Cancer, 62(6), 728—733. transformation of phenylpropanoid compounds to vanilla flavor

Pisseri, F., Bertoli, A., & Pistelli, L. (2008). Essential oils in medicine: metabolites in cultures of Haematococcus pluvialis. Process Bio—

principles of therapy. Parassitologia, 50(1—2), 89—91. Chemistry, 38, 419—426, (Barking, London, England).

"
"14","366 G. Rea et al. / Trends in Food Science & Technology 22 (2011) 353—366

Tsai, C. Y., Chen, Y. H., Chien, Y. W., Huang, W. H., & Lin, 5. H. (2010). Vucenik, l., & Shamsuddin, A. M. (2006). Protection against cancer
Effect of soy saponin 0n the growth of human colon cancer cells. by dietary IP6 and inositol. Nutrition and Cancer, 55(2),
Worldjournal of Gastroenterology: WjG, 16(27), 3371—3376. 109—125.

Vasconsuelo, A., & Boland, R. (2007). Molecular aspects of the early Weathers, P. J., Towler, M. J., & Xu, J. (2010). Bench to batch: advances
stages of elicitation of secondary metabolites in plants. Plant SCi— in plant cell culture for producing useful products. Applied
ence, 172(5), 861—875. Microbiology and Biotechnology, 85(5), 1339—1351.

Verkerk, R., Schreiner, M., Krumbein, A., Ciska, E., Holst, B., Rowland, l., Wu, J. Y., Ng, J., Shi, M., & Wu, 5. J. (2007). Enhanced secondary
et al. (2009). Glucosinolates in Brassica vegetables: the influence of metabolite (tanshinone) production of Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy
the food supply chain on intake, bioavailability and human health. roots in a novel root-bacteria coculture process. Applied Microbi-
Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 53(Suppl. 2), S219. ology and Biotechnology, 77(3), 543—550.

CURRENT The collection of Current Opinion journals is
OPI N '0 N authoritative, systematic & comprehensive
O C |
v- -'-;r=. '
'8 r '\ 5'33 ' I ,""'§ 5
- ‘ '. - t . .
m .3 J L. \ V'-
I.‘~‘,»‘V p7_. j ' . f‘y .._V "" ~.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology IMPACT FACTOR 7.820'
Current Opinion in Cell Biology IMPACT FACTOR14.153'
C urrent Opinion in Chemical Biology IMPACT FACTOR 8.295'
C urrent Opinion in Environmental Sustainability LAUNCHED m 2009
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development IMPACT Fmoa 8387'
Current Opinion in Immunology IMPACT FACTOR 10.881'
C urrent Opinion in Microbiology IMPACT FACTOR 7.866'
Current Opinion In Neurobiology IMPACT FACTOR 7.211“
Current Opinion in Pharmacology IMPACT Fmoa 7259'
Current Opinion in Plant Biology IMPACT FACTOR10.333'
C urrent Opinion in Structural Biology IMPACT FACTOR 9344'
Current Opinion in Virology LAUNCHED IN MARCH 2011
'Journal C/ravon Reporrs®, pUbu‘lShEU by Thomson Reuters, 2010 :, ~. ', ~.
{mi
.wz-yg..r3;
” 5‘.” g a
ELSB/IER

"
