"","x"
"1","AIAA SPACE 2012 Conference & Exposition AIAA 2012-5235
11 - 13 September 2012, Pasadena, California
NOFBXTM: A Non— TOXIC, “Green” Propulswn Technology
Wlth ngh Performance and Low Cost
Max Vozoffl, Greg Mungas2
Innovative Space Propulsion Systems, Houston, TX
NOFBXTM is a nitrous—oxide—based monopropellant technology, developed under NASA
and IR&D funding, that offers dramatic benefits over the current storable liquid propulsion
technology for spacecraft reaction control and maneuvering. Important characteristics of
m the propellant include performance equal to NTO/MMH, n0n—t0xicity and being
§ environmentally benign. NOFBXTM thrusters, Which are spark-ignited (re—startable) and
g deeply throttleable (100:1), have been demonstrated in the 0.4 N to 450 N (0.1 — 100 lbt)
g thrust range, With measured speciﬁc impulse (Isp) performance of over 325 seconds.
i» Innovative Space Propulsion Systems (ISPS) has received an award under NASA’s National
2 Lab program to demonstrate the 100—lbf NOFBXTM thruster 0n the ISS, launching in 2013.
<2 This paper Will describe NOFBXTM characteristics and applications, document NOFBXTM
:0 technology (TRL) and propellant (PRL) maturity evolution, report status of the ISS ﬂight
g demonstration and other developments, and discuss commercialization plans worldwide.
'2
g I. Introduction
2 Each year since 1960, between 75 and 176 spacecraft have been launched into space internationally. Although
13"" these spacecraft cover a wide range of sizes and perform many different functions, they almost all share one thing in
g common: a propulsion system using propellant derived from Hydrazine. Whether used as a mono—propellant or as
5 part of a bi—propellant system, Hydrazine is ubiquitous in spacecraft design despite signiﬁcant drawbacks including
34: extreme toxicity, severe corrosiveness, highly carcinogenic properties, explosive reactivity with many common
E materials, and the high cost and overhead associated with operational handling given these many hazards.
<2) Hydrazine has been considered a “necessary evil” because no high—performance alternative has existed — until
35 now. Innovative Space Propulsion Systems (ISPS) is now marketing NOFBXTM propulsion technology — a
% proprietary non—tOXic alternative whose performance matches the best state—of—the—art storable bi—propellant systems.
é NOFBXTM is a family of nitrous—OXide—based monopropellants, developed under NASA and IR&D funding, that
E offers dramatic beneﬁts over the current storable liquid propulsion technology for spacecraft reaction control and
Q maneuvering as well as missile and launch vehicle propulsion applications. Important characteristics of the
i propellant include performance equal to NTO/MMH, low cost propellant and components, and being non—tOXic and
i environmentally benign — both to a much higher degree than other “green” propellants currently seeking to compete
.9 . .
3 With hydrazme.
E ISPS, and its sister company Defense Propulsion Systems (DPS), has won numerous contracts and awards that
E could lead to a diverse range of applications on spacecraft, launch vehicles and missiles.
D
II. NOFBXTM Propellant Overview
NOFBXTM is a non—toxic mono—propulsion technology offering high performance (vacuum Isp up to 325
seconds), storability over a wide temperature range (including very low temperatures), and lower cost compared to
systems using hydrazine and its derivatives. Developed originally by Firestar Technologies for Mars surface
applications under NASA’S Mars Advanced Technology program for deep space application, it has since evolved to
offer a highly Viable alternative to state—of—the—art hydrazine and NTO/MMH spacecraft propulsion systems. In
addition to the propellants themselves, Firestar has developed and tested multiple thrusters, valves, ﬂashback
1 VP Business Development, Innovative Space Propulsion Holdings, 1120 NASA Parkway, Suite 505, Houston, TX
77058, Senior Member AIAA
2 President, Innovative Space Propulsion Holdings, 1120 NASA Parkway, Suite 505, Houston, TX 77058, Senior
Member AIAA
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2012 by Innovative Space Propulsion Holdings. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"2","arrestors and ground handling equipment to demonstrate practical application of the technology. 14 distinct patents
are pending or published in the US With an additional 30 international applications pending. These protections
cover both the propellant itself and the hardware required to efﬁciently and safely employ it. Advantages of
NOFBXTM technology are listed in Table 1, With some of these points expanded below.
Table 1. Com . arison of advantaes of NOFBXTM technolo With other ro u ellant es
Characteristic Solids B.""°’.°'° Hybrids '3'me M°""°pr.°'° NOFBXT'V' NOFBXT'V' Comments
LIqUIds Hypergol Hydrazme
m Vacuum Isp up to ~325$
Storable <-70°C to >+70°C
Throttlable 100:1
m Fast Start-Up —
2-” Restartable Spark ignited, no catalyst
g Safe ground handling
§ E"".""""°""m°""ta""y Efﬂuents: N2, (:0, H20, H2, (:02
: Frlendly __————
a Smooth, steady combustion
Low Part Count —
g Manufacturing/Operational
E
g A. Simple Feed System Architecture
2“ NOFBXTM is a blended monopropellant that can be used in a self—pressurizing system or With a helium
g pressurant head. Upstream of the thrusters, the feed system consists of propellant tank/s, feed lines, ﬂashback
E arrestors, and a throttling valve. There are no turbo pumps or complex valving arrangements for mixing of bi-
ES propellant constituents. This simpliﬁcation of the propulsion system correspondingly eliminates failure modes
E associated With the complexity of bi-prop systems.
0
g) B. High Performance
95 The Isp performance of NOFBXTM monopropellants has been experimentally tested up to ~325s and can
é theoretically achieve vacuum Isp of ~345s. This performance makes NOFBXTM a candidate for launch vehicle
é propulsion. NOFBXTM Isp competes With bi-propellant NTO/MMH and even approaches LOX/Kerosene without
3 the need for handling cryogenic oxidizers and fuels.
2”:
E C. Spark-Ignited
E NOFBXTM engines are ignited by a spark igniter integrated into the injector heads. Firestar has demonstrated
L8 literally thousands of consecutive re-starts Without a single missed ignition event. This re-startability coupled With
E 100:1 throttle ratio enables far more trajectory options than either a solid or standard bi-propellant engine
D
D. Deeply Throttlable
NOFBXTM engines can be throttled over a 100:1 thrust range. Such high throttlability makes them highly
versatile for launch, in-space and lander applications. When combined With the very high thrust/weight ratio of
NOFBXTM (also 100:1 for Aluminum engines), they offer a promising option for a Wide range of applications
Without warranting custom design.
E. Non-toxic Constituents and Effluents
Perhaps one of the greatest programmatic advantages of NOFBXTM mono-propellants is that they are completely
non-toxic. Toxic propellants signiﬁcantly contribute to the cost of ﬂying and re-ﬂying spacecraft. For instance, the
use of hydrazine aboard the Space Shuttle has contributed greatly to the cost of recovering the orbiter after each
mission, Which requires ~150-160 team members. Ground Team members must wear self—contained atmospheric
protective environment suits to shield them from hydrazine’s toxins. This operational cost is especially prohibitive
2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","for small spacecraft missions. In addition to safety beneﬁts, non-toxic efﬂuents eliminate the risk of toxic
contamination in the return payload of planetary sample return missions.
F. Widely Storable Temperature Range
NOBFXTM monopropellants are (truly) space storable with a freezing point < -70°C and auto ignition
temperature of >390°C to >700°C, depending on the propellant blend. The effective storage temperature range is
then <-70°C to > +70°C, with the upper limit determined by the pressure limitation of the tanks up to the auto
ignition temperature. Therefore, NOFBXTM systems don’t require active thermal management in orbit or in
excessive operations temperatures —these thermal environments will not degrade or ignite the monopropellant.
G. Pumpless Propellant Transfer
Vapor pressure is a function of temperature. By applying a small temperature differential between two
propellant tanks, NOFBXTM (in its vapor state) can be transferred from one tank to another.
29 H. One Propellant and Propulsion System Architecture for All Needs
g The simplicity of an NOFBXTM liquid monopropellant system lends itself to using a single propellant tank for
§ both the main engine as well as the Attitude Control System (ACS). A11 thrusters in the system may be run
a continuously, with controllable throttle positions or in pulsed modes.
3 Toxic Bi-Propellant For a iven im ulse erformance Non-toxic NOFBXTM
g3 Spacecraft (S/C) g p p ’ Spacecraft (S/C)
g Propulsion System NOFBXTM monopropulsnon systems are Propulsion System
53 inherently less complex, more reliable
E“ f,"" a 0 ® _ IISPH H/W
a :, ‘3 and less costly than current opnons. mspmgr
2 it R; '4 IISPH Prop
N“ i ““9“” P I Vc n do r
g -"" ""‘ NTO/MMH S/C PROPULSION NOFBX'“ J
E :> Qty COMPONENTS / SERVICE Qty
5 , O 2 Pressurant Tank 0
E3 2 Prop Tank/PMD 1
g ‘ a 2 Filters 1
(L3 g. ‘ 2 Regu lators O ""‘-
E W“ ' 2x Plumbing Assembly 1x F. E""
(0 Filter Q I Filter _ 'WDram PM a Filter
E m; «1:; 7 7 10 P/T Instrumentation 2 ‘0 J
E :-:;:=. u::;:{ 14 “""95 1 :33? 331:
g ‘34 1, 6 '-9§3- 13 Thrusters 13 V i
(2‘ 1 an ..,y _ Systems Engineering, _ v y
2: ,Z§%§:i——.!'3§;Iq Integration & Test :22: 222:
>\. .7; -Csi'
g I - Propellant Load & Ops -
E A A
3 Figure 1. Side by Side Comparison of Generic Propulsion Systems, NTO/MMH vs. NOFBX
III. NOFBXTM Regeneratively Cooled Engine Technology
Under the NASA Mars Advanced Technology program, development of < 22 N (5 lbf) NOFBXTM short pulse
breadboard engines was undertaken for initial proof—of—concept evaluation of the NOFBXTM monopropellants in
thruster applications.7 Under the NASA Altair Lunar Lander BAA industry studies in addition to investigations into
compact, non-toxic, high performance NOFBXTM lunar ascent engines,8 the need was identiﬁed in the more generic
manned space transportation system for 111 N — 445 N (25 lbf — 100 lbi) non-toxic ACS thrusters. Under
independent studies conducted for JPL for the NASA Mars Advanced Technology program, 445 N (100 lbi) engines
were found to be a useful engine design baseline for primary delta V engines for unmanned applications given the
large number of unmanned missions that have already been developed and studied incorporating 445 N (100 lbf)
NTO/MMH engines.6
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","In response, Firestar has developed a series of increasingly sophisticated propulsion products designed to
demonstrate NOFBXTM for spacecraft applications. The initial component was a Flashback arrestor: a prerequisite
from a safety perspective for all other development and testing of monopropellant engines. Thrusters were then
tested starting with .4 N (0.1 lbf), then 9 N (2 lbf), 22 N (5 lbi), 111 N (25 lbf) and 445 N (100 lbf). These two most
recent engines, the “NOFBX-25” and “NOFBX-100” (see Fig. 2), use the propellant to actively cool the thruster
chamber. This microﬂuidic regenerative chamber design is so effective that the outer wall of the engine operates
below 150°C, allowing the engine to be fabricated from low-cost materials such as nickel or even aluminum, further
reducing cost and increasing the thrust to weight ratio to over 100:1 for this aluminum engine.

The low cost of materials, combined with a fabrication process adapted from the photolithographic techniques of
the semiconductor industry, results in a highly repeatable, extremely low recurring cost engine. The carbon-carbon
vacuum nozzles used with the NOFBX-100 were also developed in-house using a patented wet lay-up technique
adapted from one widely used to manufacture aircraft parts. This engine and nozzle, along with the integrated spark
igniter, thrott1e valve, tank and associated feed system components, is the one that ISPS will be demonstrating on the

Z? ISS under a National Lab award in 2013. f ‘
a ,.
9' u f ‘3 I
§ ‘ ' ‘2: VA / :1
g _ . 2 f
2' - -‘ ' :2! 4;”
Q 7 . , . ,
g) ‘ u 1&0.“
g ~ -: _ _ nmu:
E
i
g ”I” go
E3 I A"" _.
é .
<2) . .
(2 Figure 2. NOFBXTM 445 N (100 lbt) engine NASA Phase I/II SBIR 2008-2010 development. T 0p Left —
g demonstration of first gas-cooled monopropellant engine in history. Bottom Left — Copy of the 114 N (26
E lbi) vacuum equivalent test engine on permanent display in Washington, D.C.. T 0p Right — NOFBXTM
E 445 N (100 lbt) development. Bottom Right — Successful hotﬁre test of NOFBXTM 445 N (100 lbt)
2;: combustion chamber.
>1 1
3 IV. NOFBXTM ISS Demonstration ~ .
L: In November 2010, Firestar, in concert with three strategic corporate
5 partners, established Innovative Space Propulsion Systems (ISPS) C ‘
speciﬁcally to serve as a “technology incubator” to commercialize ‘
NOFBXTM technology. ISPS was awarded the ISS Flight Experiment
contract in February 2011 to ﬂy a 445 N (100 lbf) NOFBXTM engine j ~
assembly (see Fig. 3) with associated valves, tanks, feed system, and 1 §
propellant to the ISS, launching in 2013. Key objectives of this ﬁrst in-space L fioﬁgizmsz
NOFBXTM demonstration are to: ® A. L K-Flashback
00 Demonstrate on-orbit thruster operation modes [4.4 N (1 lbf) to 445 N K : ffi‘gigx .gnitewox
(100 lbf) continuous burn and impulse bit pulse trains] 3 M‘E'm'éni“
. / m Control um (ECU)
00 Demonstrate on-orb1t NOFBXTM pumpless mono-propellant transfer N-PintleValve
in a microgravity environment N

00 Demonstrate passive thermal storage of NOFBXTM system in an Figure 3. 100 lbf ﬂight engine in

extreme on-orbit thermal environment development for ISS National Lab

00 Obtain certiﬁcation for use on ISS (ISS Payload Safety Review Panel) BAA for deployment on hotﬁre

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","00 Complete MIL—STD2105D Threat Hazard Assessment plan and related testing of NOFBXTM
monopropellants
V. NOFBXTM Technology Applications
Table 2 contains a high—level overview of the characteristics of NOFBXTM technology. Although usually only a
few of these are drivers for any speciﬁc application, the large number of favorable attributes leads to a very wide
and diverse range potential applications. Table 3 provides an overview of some applications that have been studied
by ISPS, DPS and our customers, including a description of the relevant intrinsic beneﬁts for each.
Table 2. NOFBX Characteristics Overview
Characteristic NOFBXT'V' Monopropulsion System Summary
E Monopropellant Less complex, better reliability, lower mass, and lower cost.
E . . Eliminates the need for separate pressurant source (e.g. He) for many
3 Self—pressurlzmg . .
:3 applications
é High Specific Impulse Vacuum lsp up to 325 s; comparable to SOA hypergolics bi-propellants.
2 High Density-lsp Higher densnty specnfle Impulse than hypergolics WlthOUt the thermal
'3. control demands
TE? . Spark source built into injector; allows unlimited restarts; no catalyst bed or
9 Spark-lgnlted h
5 eater
3 Can operate and be stored over a wide temperature range: -7OC to >
N“ Storable
2 +600
<2: Deep throttle (100:1) \(lllattkelmple pressure regulation can be throttled down to very low levels
a:
E Cool-runnin thrusters Regenerative thrust chamber design allows outer thruster surfaces to
5 g operate at < 1500
LU
a High ThrustNVeight 100:1 thrust/weight for Aluminum thrusters
z
8 Accurate Propellant Quantity of remaining propellant can be measured to within 0.1% for the
E Level Monitoring final 15% of the load
:5 Compatible with most conventional feed system hardware components
2 Compatibility and materials; and industry- established options exist for weII-known
4: incompatibilities
’3 . . Safe and lower cost ground handling and transportation; can be mixed on-
: Non-tOXIc constituents site
8 .
Non-toxic effluents Effluents consist of N2, CO, H20, H2, 002. Water is only condensable.
Lower Cost Lower cost to manufacture and operate.
. The very fast kinetics of NOFBXT'V' results in smooth, steady combustion
Low Acoustics . ﬂ . ,,
WIth no popping
Liquid, Gas or 2-Phase Desngned to accommodate IIqUId, gas and two phase states; reduces
unusable propellant
5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","Table 3. Crosscutting Applications for NOFBXTM technology
Crosscutting Applications
-—
Landers .
(water is the only condensable)
Storability over a wide temperature range and extreme simplicity are key
Planetary Sample requirements for applications such as the Mars Ascent Vehicle for MSR.
Additionally, NOFBXTM is currently under study by NASA Mars Program as the
Return . . . . .
only option that prov1des adequate performance to attain s1ngle—stage—to—orb1t on
Mars.
22 N (5—lbf) engine serves as an ideal main engine for small spacecraft a well as
RCS thruster for large ones. Low component, integration and propellant costs,
Small Spacecraft capable of both pulse—mode and continuous mode operation, high thrust/weight,
a removes the quantum step in cost and complexity required for toxic propellants,
a enabling energetic propulsion on smallsat missions
§ 440 N (lOO—lbf) serves as an ideal apogee engine and 22 N (5—lbf) serves as an
E ideal RCS engine. NOFBXTM also provides high ﬁdelity knowledge of the
2 Large Spacecraft remaining propellant load, enabling efﬁcient operation and end—of—mission
g planning. Large propellant loads amplify the advantage of very low propellant
3 cost.
E . . Deep throttleability enables a wide dynamic range of impulses from a single
.2 Rendezvous, Inspectlon, . . . . .
g
é’ . condensable) ensure solar arrays, radiators, Windows, mirrors, sensors and other
9 fuellng . . .
E sens1t1ve surfaces are not contaminated.
a
8 . . . Similar rendezvous requirements to above
v; mltlgatlon
£1
:2??? Current and in—development NOFBXTM technology (and the 440 N(lOO—lbf)
g thruster speciﬁcally) lends itself to launch vehicle roll control and settling motor
55 applications, replacing the only toxic propellants on the vehicles. DPS is also
E Launch vehicles under contract to provide primary propulsion of upper stages for multiple
a prospective customers, either by clustering existing engines or by scaling to larger
2-5 thrust classes. In addition to low cost, storability, throttleability, restartability,
r: non—toxicity and near—100% propellant utilization are leading factors.
8 Safety and recurring operational costs for recoverable and resusable spacecraft
E (orbital and suborbital) are greatly enhanced by removing hazardous propellants.
:3 NOFBXTM is completely non—toxic (unlike ADN and HAN) and can be purged
(<0: Recovery & Reuse f . . .
2 rom the system Simply by opening a valve and venting to atmosphere.
4: Furthermore, the extremely low operating temperatures of NOFBXTM engines
g (<200 C) greatly reduces thermal cycle limitations and enables extensive reuse.
E
Q VI. NOFBXTM Technology Evolution
In the 8+—year development history of NOFBXTM technology, Firestar Technologies has developed NOFBXTM
system hardware from components in the early stages, to breadboard/brassboard during the technology optimization
period (0.1—lbf, 5—lbf and 25—lbf), to full high—ﬁdelity prototype with the lOO—lbf NOFBX—lOO engine. As described
below, this hardware has been validated in the NOFBXTM—relevant space operational environment, and the NOFBX—
100 thruster is entering qualiﬁcation testing in the lead up to launch to the International Space Station in 2013 under
our National Lab award. Finally, Firestar has experimentally developed engine models that describe the NOFBXTM
thermal transport processes. This includes adaptations to the Bartz equationl, by accounting for real property
variations in the combustion gas boundary layer based on high temperature NOFBXTM combustion chemistry. The
geometric scaling laws used in the Bartz equation do still apply. With prototype—level hardware, documented
performance in relevant environments, and a thorough and validated understanding the of scaling laws over a range
of thrust, the NOFBXTM engine system technology has rapidly advanced to TRL 6.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","It is critical to emphasize that many traditional rocket engine design approaches, formulas, drivers and other
considerations cannot be routinely applied to combustion gas boundary layer engines such as NOFBXTM
regenerative engine chambers. In NOFBXTM regeneratively cooled engines, combustion gasses are in excess of
3200C while the inner wall of the chamber is maintained at below 500YC without the use of ﬁlm cooling over a
large fraction of the engine and the inner jacket wall is maintained below 200YC. The strong temperature gradients
induce property variations in the boundary layers that crudely speaking help enhance the insulating property of the
combustion gas boundary layer primarily through a signiﬁcant change in the boundary layer Prandtl number relative
to the freestream ﬂow. These engine models have been validated through correlation with test results in 110 N (25—
lbf) and then 440 N (lOO—lbf) engines. The latter engine was scaled up from the former using these new models with
only 4 months between concept and successful hot—ﬁring. Both NOFBXTM engines are established at TRL 5 (or
even 6) as described below.

A. TRL 1 to TRL 4
a In 2003, a group led by Mr. Greg Mungas conducted extensive research into the basic principles of nitrous oxide
2‘ blend monopropellant combustion chemistry under NASA’s Mars Technology Program application, achieving TRL
§ 1 and TRL 2. The results showed that strategically designed nitrous oxide—fuel mixtures demonstrated high speciﬁc
g energy density and bipropellant—like ISP performance (see Fig. 4).
g a Vapor Pressure (Experimental) —Vapor Pressure Fit(Reidel)
:. 0 Sat qu. (Experimental) —Sat. Liq. Flt (Spencer-Danner)
8 — — Ullage GasFit (Redllch-Kwong) —N20 Sal. Liquid
g 1200 * ’ "" ‘ "" * ,1 1.2
g I
§ N20 Satmated Liquid a:
f3 A 1000 O . ' ' y 1.0
g '5, NOFB37 Satwated Liquid . . ‘ :
g 9; (Curve Fit 9’ = 0.9937) , .~ . ’5
m“ g 800 o 4"" t 0.8 (\J
c; Q, . _ . . . . _ . . . . . . ”.5, , O Q :
g g 600 Tanked Density ofl'lydrazine w/He Pressman! . I 0.6 Q.
8 E 400 Vapor Pressure _ - : 0.4 C
‘2) 3 (Curve Fit R2 = 0.9993) _ <i 8
E2 % . I NOF837 Va or / I
g > 200 . - Presaue Ullage gas I I I : 0'2
a , . ' _,_,r' t
O _ _.. .— —- -— "" ""' l
(:0: 0 “ - "" "" .— 1 [r 0.0
<2: -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
>~.
E Temperature, T (C) Tc"" 39'4“
3?: PC, : 1043.5 p§a
'3; Figure 4. NOFBXTM phase diagram - NOFB37 Saturated Liquid/Ullage Gas Density and Vapor
5 Pressure vs. Temperature.

In 2004—2007 Firestar developed the ﬁrst proof of concept breadboard engine, a 0.1 lbf engine with pulse mode
only capability, which advanced the system to TRL 3. Demonstration of this 0.1 lbf engine was the ﬁrst system—
level proof of concept. With this effort the team proved that NOFBXTM propellant could be controlled in a system,
ignited, and burned to generate thrust. As part of this development, Firestar continued to study all aspects of the
propellant to fully characterize performance and material properties. The extensive characterization metrics
included theoretical combustion performance (speciﬁc impulse, gas chemistry, and exhaust gas temperatures) for
both an equilibrium nozzle and “frozen throat” kinetics, thermal ignition limits, impact sensitivity, spark
resistance/dielectric breakdown, toxicity, phase equilibrium parameters/critical properties, enthalpy of vaporization
and throttling, miscibility and mixture stability, thermophysical and transport properties, and cold ﬂow valve testing.

In 2008—2010, as part of a SBIR Phase I/II contract, Firestar completed the vast majority of the data gathering
and theoretical characterization of the propellant. Following this effort, it started an intense experiment and testing
campaign to correlate analysis results with experimental data. As part of this work, thruster design iterations

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","included a 2-lbf breadboard engine that used high-temperature materials to increase the duty cycle and a 5-lb
brassboard engine that introduced a regeneratively cooled engine j acket. Both the 2-lbf and 5-1bfthrusters were hot-
ﬁred in pulse mode only as part of a low ﬁdelity system implementation including NOFBXTM propellant, tanks,
valves and sensors. These additional components were sourced from those available on the market for automotive
and industrial applications.
The next iteration was a 110 N (25-lbf) brassboard that introduced microﬂuidic regenerative cooling technology
and could sustain steady-state ﬁring >30 seconds — well past thermal equilibrium. On Dec. 6, 2009 Firestar
El NOFB3 Energy Density vs. OIF
1800
1600 wore: at 30°C (Upper Bound)
3 261400
33 t NOFB3 at -1oo°c (Lower Bound)
g g 1200
E 3.1000
2' g
.'_: 800
c
a o
g3 3 600
:6 h
g g
E; I.” 400
g 200
a: o -______.
i. 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0
g OIF
8
ES
; Isp (NOFB3 at 100 psia Chamber Pressure) vs 0F (To=298 K)
LU
é +Vacuum F +200” F *Vacuum Eq *20011 Sq *T-ch F --T-th F
<:
53 360 - ,, , ~v 7* « VA wi'ﬂ ~ ~** WV, ~ ~ ~ ~ , ~. 3500
z
8
E 35° 3000
Q
(:5: 34° I EQUILIBRIUM
2500 A
E. 330 E,
8 CD
3 E 320 2000 :3:
E a. 2
a E 310 1500 8
E
300 FRO ""ATxTﬂBO ' o
1000 |-
290
280 500
270 0
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
OIF
Figure 5. NOFBX3X 21) Energy Density vs. O/F and b) Speciﬁc Impulse vs. O/F
8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","experimentally demonstrated and veriﬁed through jacket thermocouple measurements a series of successful gas—
cooled engine runs to full thermal equilibrium (about 4 seconds) with the NOFBX COLT25B—2 series engine (see
Fig. 5). Note this system was running in blow—down mode, hence the tanks pressure continuously decreases, with
mass—ﬂow rate to the engine (and consequently chamber pressure) tailing off accordingly. This serves to verify
throttlability and thermal proﬁle under worst case cooling conditions.
B. TRL 5: Relevant Environments
The primary criterion for advancing from TRL 4 t0 TRL 5 is performance demonstration in a relevant
environment. A relevant environment is a speciﬁc subset of the operational environment that is required to
realistically simulate the stresses imposed by the operational environment on performance—critical aspects of the
technology. For space—based applications, the three primary stressor environments are vacuum, microgravity, and
temperature. As described below, for NOFBXTM engine system technology, none of these space—speciﬁc
environments affect critical performance and the TRL 5 relevant environment is equivalent to the laboratory
2 environment (with the exception of the nozzle).
(\1
E
g 1. T hermal
g In the NOFBXTM thruster, the primary form of heat transport from the combustion chamber is into the propellant
if in the microﬂuidic jacket, not radiative into the ambient environment. The microﬂuidic regenerative cooling
? technology employed in the 440 N (lOO—Ibf) engine jackets is so effective that the inner jacket walls are maintained
8 in steady state operation at 150—175YC despite combustion gas temperatures inside the chamber of over 3200YC. In
E addition, typical spacecraft thermal environments for a propellant tank are much tighter than those required for
O . . . . . .
g NOFBXTM propellant. Therefore, a space—hke thermal enVironment Will not introduce unique performance—altering
g stresses to the NOFBXTM engine.
g 4 0 0 - _ rffllijﬂfjjh31:1:mtﬁﬁ‘ 8 0
g ‘ Ffﬁ'x‘rv- .. _ _ _._ ‘ PXT033:u;j:x:|::(_:-:1j]’jl‘:Ii‘j:f""i‘:{ﬂ:lj-L “ — Utifiitqf,
V3“ 350 "" _’_L:""‘j;‘:-:‘ ‘ ”""'~""—§:L—""_L‘:_';' -— —' 70
g |\ ﬁgivi‘f o Throat
‘2“ 3 ‘\ .—;C’:'CPW . Converging 1
8 300 . . . Converging 2 - 60
m . ‘K .
E | ..\ - Convergung 3 I
Z A - D - :3 i
5 9,250 . .\ Injector 50 A
m w I "" ‘ '. —- Chamber Pressure <
O Q . A A A \ —
< . (j ‘A ' , (0
(DE g l - u ‘n \. Q
% ’C 200 : ’53. . .\.-\ 40 E
é 775 I I I .M ﬁ—ﬂ 5-, a
Q 2 150 ""f ' . 30 <0
(<5 ﬁ I .0. A \ ' ' \ 9—)
:2: ‘0 .00.... ‘A‘“‘ s
g 100 ' r. 0’ o“. ‘ “Aumtmngmllmwmuunlrﬂ;“ """" ‘unA‘ 20
'0‘; o .M.°% mmmmmmwwo
L; * .9 a M
5 50 ‘WW] 10
0 L ‘ ‘~ 1 : 1 0
0 5 1o 15 20 25 30 35
Time (See)
Figure 6. 31-sec0nd run to thermal equilibrium demonstrating a long duration burn and highly dynamic
chamber pressure range down to sub-sonic flow indicating that a high throttling range should be achievable
2. Microgravity
Unlike with liquid propellants, NOFBXTM engines and other system components are designed to operate with
equal efﬁciency with liquid, gas, or two—phase ﬂuid propellant. Furthermore, once arrived at the thruster, the
propellant will always be in its gas form, therefore obviating the need for propellant management devices and
techniques to ensure liquid feed to the engine assembly. Testing performed to date has demonstrated operation with
9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","all three phases of propellant and transitions in between. Low ﬂow rate (i.e. chamber pressure) gas phase ﬂows
have been identiﬁed as worst case ﬂows due to the poorer jacket cooling capability of gas phase ﬂows (i.e.
associated with the much lower thermal conductivity of gases relative to liquids in the coolant jackets) and the
higher pressure drop of these lower density ﬂows. Liquid propellant ﬂows cause the engine to operate at lower
temperatures due to ﬂash evaporation in the j ackets and with lower pressure drop throughout the jacket. Also, the
vapor pressure of NOFBXTM at typical operating temperatures in the tank readily produce forces on ﬂuid elements
that completely overwhelm any gravitational forces on the propellant throughout the propulsion system in any
realistic spacecraft 0r launch vehicle application. Even at very low feed system pressure gradients of 22.6 kPa/m (l
psia / ft), >3 g’s of acceleration are produced on ﬂuid elements. Consequently, the effects of microgravity do not
affect propellant management or overall performance of the thrusters.
3. Vacuum
In general, ﬂuid dynamics and heat transport in the engine chamber upstream of a choked throat are not affected
a by exhaust pressure at all. In vacuum conditions the supersonic exhaust plume fully occupies the engine nozzle such
33 that the ﬂow—ﬂeld inside the nozzle that produces thrust is not at all affected by small exhaust pressure changes as
g long as the exhaust pressure is sufﬁciently low to cause full plume expansion at the eXit plane of the nozzle. In
g addition, as mentioned under the thermal section above, the chamber wall heat transport is not signiﬁcantly affected
if by convection 0r conduction t0 the external environment as it pales in comparison to the high heat ﬂuX heat transfer
$ from the combustion chamber into the regeneratively cooled jacket (e.g. ~35 kW for a 440 N (lOO—lbf) engine
g operating at a 100% throttle level, that is not directly expelled through the engine exhaust). The single component
g of the NOFBXTM engine system affected by vacuum is the nozzle, as vacuum conditions are required to allow plume
g expansion into the nozzle and for appropriate thermal radiative (without convection) and ablation effects to be
3 observed
:2
E C. TRL 6
g From this point, a 440 N (lOO—lbf) engine was designed and tested. This step in the development history serves
2“ as validation of the thermal and other analytical design models developed by Firestar, enabling successful scaling,
i) fabrication and test ﬁring in less than 4 months from concept to hot—ﬂre. Figure 7 shows analytical thermal
c2: predictions vs. measured values for the 110 N (25—lbf) engine at various low throttle settings, which are worst—case
g; thermal conditions due to the gas—cooled regenerative j acket.
E The current 440 N (lOO—lbf) engine with a carbon—carbon nozzle is a high—ﬁdelity ﬂight prototype and has been
5 successfully hot—ﬂred for multiple 5 second ﬁrings in a vacuum environment (<0.5t0rr), bringing the TRL 0f the 440
(“j N (lOO—lbf) engine to TRL 6.
(E; This engine design is a high—ﬁdelity prototype and, after relatively minor modiﬁcations and integration with
% ﬂight—like other components from the engine assembly (valves, igniter avionics etc.), will be entering qualiﬁcation
% testing in the next few months. The Flight Unit, along with tanks, valves, redundant avionics, is scheduled to launch
Q to the 188 in mid—2013 for an in—space demonstration under a NASA National Lab award. This ﬂight demonstration
(:2; 150
3 3135 a
U .-
:3 $120 .
E i
3 E 105 ~
g 90 i
E
g 75 i
60 i
._ — Engine Thrust
g 45 a
8 —Engine Chamber Pressure
E 30 i
15 ~
0 l i l t t t l t l 1 ‘
0.""!?QQQN.?QQQN?‘Q°QQNYKQ°QQNV.~Q°QQNY
OOOOOHHHHHNNNNNMMMMMV????mmm
Time [sec]
Figure 7. NOFBX 100 440N engine and carbon-carbon nozzle 0n the vacuum test stand, August, 2011.
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"11","will boost NOFBXTM as a technology, and the

440 N (lOO—lbf) engine assembly, to TRL 8 or 9,

depending on the applicable operations ,.-‘ ‘
considered. It should be noted that f - . .. ‘_ ﬁfizg—v’
comprehensive characterization of ablation rates :- 2: t .7 x;\ . '

in the carbon—carbon nozzle have not yet been I . i ' \ ..
performed. The nozzle composite has been .1. 0 ‘i-L- "" \"" ""~~wa
tested w1th oxyacetylene torch tests to determine ’\_&""p; .L H

high temperature thermal shock performance. \\\_ i f . “m.“

D. Component-level Technical Maturity m U I a

Multiple valves between TRL6 and 9 have 7 I ' -

been found to be usable for a NOFBX—based . ‘ _
2 propulsion system. Sources for automotive and (\‘\ ,‘
53 industrial nitrous valves have been used 7 \‘5 \
2 previously for test stand applications, where they /, / ' \‘ s; ;
g have performed well. Although space ﬂight o. _// ‘- A
if environments are different and qualiﬁcation will Figure 8- NOFBX 100 440N engine and carbon-carbon
$ be required, automotive environments are one of HOZZIB 011 the vacuum tBSt stand, August, 2011-
C; the most hostile applications found in industry so
3 this is seen as minimal risk.
g Multiple tanks between TRL6 and 9 have been found to be usable for a NOFBX—based propulsion system.
S Nitrous tank suppliers have provided preliminary assessments of tank TRLs at >6. Some have already performed
53 nitrous testing. For COPV conﬁgurations (the most likely implementation), materials compatibility issues will not
g be a concern as NOFBXTM will not be in contact with the composite. Some qualiﬁcation testing will be required to
g demonstrate performance under all temperature, pressure and non—equilibrium conditions (such as rapid blow—
2“ down).
E) Igniter aVionics can be same as for the 188 440 N (100 lbf) engine, as the spark energy required is independent
“2"" of engine size (due to the propellant being pre—mixed at the molecular level). This module is currently being built
3 and tested for the ISS demonstration and will be qualiﬁed in the coming months. Risk is considered minimal.
E ISPS’ proprietary carbon—carbon nozzle technology has been oxyacetylene torch—tested for high temperature
C? thermal shock performance and properties and to ensure the materials do not delaminate. A 440 N (lOO—lbf) nozzle
5 has also been brieﬂy tested under vacuum on the 440 N (lOO—lbf) engine. The risk of scaling the carbon—carbon
(E; nozzle to other thrust classes is extremely small, and NOFBXTM missions could ﬂy using more traditional niobium
% nozzle if desired, although this decreases the cost beneﬁt.
5 E. Scaling Requirements
:5 The evolution of NOFBXTM engine technology so far has proven successful over three orders of magnitude of
<2: thrust level (0.44 N 9 440 N), albeit with increasing levels of capability and performance. For steady—state
4: operation, NOFBXTM thrusters require a robust, advanced regenerative cooling system that is not typical of
§ traditional thrusters in this thrust class (which are radiatively cooled). This technology is also not typical for larger
ED regeneratively—cooled engines (which are traditionally cooled using the liquid fuel). NOFBXTM thrusters are
8 designed to be regeneratively cooled using the propellant in its gas—phase, while keeping metal chamber wall
temperatures well below the auto—ignition temperature of the propellant. For this reason, when designing the 110 N
(25—lbf) engine, Firestar invented its patent—pending micro—ﬂuidic cooling jacket and developed its own thermal
transport models based on fundamental physical processes.

Test results from the 110 N (25—lbf) engines have shown that the Bartz Equation1 drastically underestimates (by
>300%) heat ﬂux immediately upstream of the engine throat, which, due to very small L* of these engines,
effectively encompasses a large fraction of the NOFBXTM engine chamber. Firestar was therefore driven to develop
its own design codes based on fundamental physics and chemistry that could reproduce test results and be used for
scaling to other engine sizes. The success of this approach and its supporting design models was proven Via the
successful testing of the 110 N (25—lbf) engine, and then further validated by successfully scaling the engine up in
thrust by a factor of four to 440 N (lOO—lbf) and successfully test ﬁring within 4 months. Figure 9 shows actual
verses predicted data for the 110 N engine while operating in a worst—case, throttled—down mode at around 22 N (5—
lbf) equivalent thrust (nominal thrust is at 150 psia chamber pressure).

1 1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"12","The NOFBXTM 110 N (25-lbf) and 440 N (lOO-lbi) engines, and the associated design codes, have therefore
been proved to “adequately addressing all scaling issues”, which is a requirement of TRL 6 in addition to having
been tested in a relevant environment. These models are also applicable to smaller engines and can readily be used
to roll the latest innovations into the smaller 22N (5-lbf) engine (a similar scale factor), with the both larger engines

Thrust Chamber TEMPERATURES \
(200:1) Pressure (Celsius) ‘
mmnmiiim
550 31 l mu _3_6%
-----|||
m 6.65 37.5 nlnl l 1.97%
a ---l-_l
S m 8.51 l lnl 2.35%
-----|||
m -----|||
2' 53 8.23%
e l |-l
Q
i” 1
g lnj. C3 C2 C1 Throat
5 o 0 o 0 o
g
i
s“ a
g I
m ' : ' 0
E -2 -1 o : 1
a .
U I
LU
O
<:
53
z
8
%
Q
:5
E -1
E
E 450 9000
L3 [-
E Q 400 8000
a a. 350 7000 52
GE) ""00 ‘ 6000 N\
E— ‘ E
‘53 250 5000 3
g A 200 4000 a
:1 Ed
:3. 1 50 3000 g
e . a:
G. 100 2000 ‘5
== 50 1000 cu
cu I
Q
2 0 0
-2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0
Nozzle Axis (in)
Figure 9. Predicted worst case hot conditions for 110N engine operating in deep-throttled 22N gas phase
12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"13","serving as high—ﬂdelity super—scale demonstrations of the smaller versions.
F. Other Unique Design and Scaling Considerations
It is critical to emphasize that many of the design drivers, equations and considerations typically employed for
traditional engine designs in this class are not directly applicable to NOFBXTM engine technology. There are unique
models required to understand heat—ﬂow processes in engines where the chamber inner wall is operating at steady
state temperatures below 500°C while combustion is simultaneously occurring at over 3200°C. Understanding and
successfully modeling the chemistry and heat transport mechanisms in the resulting combustion gas boundary layer
and coupled micro—ﬂuidic regenerative propellant heat—sink has been a maj or and lasting achievement of NOFBXTM
technical development to—date.
l. Combustion processes are at molecular-scale — completely unaﬁ’eetea’ by thruster scale (unlike traditional
hydrazine 0r NTO/MMH)
a As a monopropellant, NOFBXTM is pre—mixed at the molecular level, resulting in an extremely stable and
23 consistent combustion process that does not depend on the size of the injector face. The ﬂame front attaches to the
g injector and forms a smooth ﬂame front. There are none of the mixing—dominated transport phenomena that drive
3 the design and performance of typical bi—propellant engines, nor the combustion inconsistencies in either spatial or
if time domains associated with discrete injectors and atomization processes. There are no “pops” or micro—explosions
S? because combustion is occurring at molecular—scales. Pressure traces during ﬁring resemble cold—gas pressure traces
E with none of the “noise” typically associated with pressure traces for bi—propellant engines. The combustion process
g itself is therefore unaffected by sealing the thruster physical size up or down between 440 N (lOO—lbf) and 22 N (5—
% lbf) sized engines.
7?: 2. Injector ana’ ﬂashback arrester are made using core geometrical elements at 10’s to 100 ’s of micron scale —
3 these elements remain unchanged at 22 N (541919, 110 N (25-11919, and 440 N (100-11919 thrust scales, only number of
g elements arrayed is varied.
3; Because combustion processes are at a molecular—scale, the design requirements for the injector with integrated
f3 ﬂashback arrester lead to a design that is made up of a large number of very small elements. In the 440 N (lOO—lbf)
(2: designs, this core element is arrayed across the injector face approximately 48,000 times, and the same element can
g; be used over a very wide range of thrust levels, only arrayed a varying number of times to produce the necessary
E mass ﬂow rate.
LU
U
(”j 3. The geometry of the microﬂuia’ic coolingjacket can also scale (approximately geometrically) over a very wide
a range ofchamber sizes without approaching manufacturing limits
% Though there are a number of differences, the thermal design is most similar to larger—scale regeneratively—
% cooled thrust chambers employing other propulsion technologies. In this regard, scaling the thruster geometrically
Q requires the microﬂuidic cooling jacket to also be scaled by a similar factor. Typical dimensions for the 440 N (100—
% lbf) thruster are a 2mm—thick wall and 0.5 mm—wide micro—ﬂuidic elements. The corresponding dimensions for a 22
E: N (5—lbf) thruster for example, would be ~0.4 mm—thick wall and 0.1 lmm—wide micro—ﬂuidic elements. Features of
§ this scale are well within the fabrication capabilities of the Microlayer thin—ﬂlm fabrication technique used to
g produce the NOFBXTM thrusters. Scaling up is even easier.
6
a
5 4. T 0tal heat load that must be absorbed by the propellant relative to the propellantﬂow rate will vary with sealing
(e.g. 17% higherfor a 22 N (5 lb]? chamber than in an equivalent 110 N (25-11)]? design); however demonstrated
design margin and a decrease in ratio ofinternal surface area to throat area more than compensates
The 110 N (25—lbf) thruster was initially designed using the Bartz equation1 to estimate the rate of heat transfer
from the hot combustion gases to the chamber walls. However, given the substantial variation historically seen in
hot—side heat ﬂux measurements, substantial margin was also included in the design — i.e. it was designed to be
capable of absorbing heat ﬂuxes well in excess of that estimated using Bartz. The experimental results of the 110 N
(25—lbf) development demonstrated the wisdom of this approach, as measured heat—ﬂuxes in that chamber exceeded
that predicted by Bartz by up to 3.5x, particularly in the converging portion of the nozzle. However, the cooling
design was able to accommodate this much—increased heat ﬂux without issue thanks to its included margin. The as—
measured heat ﬂux proﬁle (appropriately scaled) became the baseline proﬁle used in the design of the 440 N (100—
lbf) versions of the thruster, and can be used to scale the design up or down from there.
Though the ratio of heat ﬂux at a location in the converging portion of the nozzle to that at the throat is not well
predicted by the Bartz relationship, we believe that the overall geometric and pressure scaling factors used by Bartz
13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"14","do apply. Speciﬁcally, for geometrically—similar nozzle contours, we expect the hot—side non—dimensional heat
transfer coefﬁcient does scale as Reynolds number to the 0.8 power. In turn this implies that the dimensional heat
ﬂux will scale as throat diameter to the —0.2 power, or that the throat heat ﬂux of a 22N (5—1bf) thruster will be 17%
larger than that seen in the 110 N (25—1bf) thruster. This means that a temperature rise of the coolant in a 22N (5—1bf)
thruster using this design will be 17% larger than the 110 N (25—1bf) thruster, which is easily accommodated using
our existing microﬂuidic design techniques.

VII. NOFBXTM Propellant Readiness Level (PRL)

It is difﬁcult to assign a TRL to a propellant, but Bossard et. a1.2 developed a Propellant Readiness Level (PRL)
characterization metric scale based on Mankins’ description3 of the TRL scale. Like TRLs, the PRL scale has 9
levels — 1) Basic Properties, 2) Potential Applications, 3) Lab—Based Testing, 4) Analytical Prediction Models, 5)
Thruster Testing, 6) Subscale Breadboard Testing, 7) Full—Scale Testing, 8) Qualiﬁcation Testing, and 9) Flight
Testing. Exit criteria for PRLs are based on a set of 14 propellant attributes. Each PRL is assigned a subset of the

Q 14 attributes as required characterization data to meet the maturation level criteria. The table below illustrates the

a attribute mapping to PRL and current status of NOFBXTM characterization. As described above, Firestar began its

8, extensive studies of NOFBXTM propellants in 2003 in its work for NASA’s Mars Technology program and has since

E progressively developed the hardware, software, and testing/characterization required for an 440 N (100—1bf) engine

5 system (NOFBX—100) for launch to the 188 in 2013. Based on the characterization history in Table 4 and the level

g of system development, NOFBXTM propellant has met all PRL 5 criteria, has met all but one PRL 6 criteria (except

a for the “bomb” test) and will be completing all characterization and tests for PRL 7 and PRL 8 in the next few

95? months.

§ Table 4. Propellant attribute characterizations required for achieving PRL validation. The boxes shaded

if green have been demonstrated for NOFBXTM propellant.

E

g Thermo— . . Injector/

: cations Predlctlons Storablllty Testing

g Data Geometry

2 . . .. Combustion

(”3 Compatibility

5%

a

% VIII. Commercialization

% ISPH was established by Firestar Technologies — inventor of NOFBXTM and owner of the intellectual property

‘2 (“IP”) — and three strategic partner companies, to pursue applications, manufacture components and usher this

i technology into the marketplace. The ISPH management team is a highly talented world—class group of vested

E professionals with deep technical expertise, demonstrated experience in founding and growing space—related

g businesses and extensive project management capabilities. This team is motivated and equipped to bring this

’3 technology from prototype to commercial market and is already achieving signiﬁcant traction with aerospace

E systems providers, propulsion technology providers and government agencies. ISPH believes this team can

5 aggressively create and pursue these business opportunities, adapt to the market’s response to this disruption, and
manage what should be a rapidly growing business.

ISPH intends to focus its initial effort on propellant and related propulsion components for civil and commercial
spacecraft reaction control thrusters in the 5—1bf t0 100—1bf (22—440 N) thrust class. Thrusters in this class are
typically used on all medium and large class satellites, along with associated valves, tanks and the NOFBXTM
propellant itself. ISPH’s subsidiary Innovative Space Propulsion Systems (ISPS) will address this civil and
commercial market segment, offering products of comparable form, ﬁt and function to those from the competitors,
but with superior performance and at lower cost to the user. In addition to the US effort, ISPS intends to market
these products internationally and is ﬁling a Commodity Jurisdiction application with the US Department of State
which, if granted, would greatly simplify international sales and partnerships. In the meantime, ISPS is engaging
overseas customers through the appropriate Technical Assistance Agreements (TAAs) though the State Department
to comply with International Trafﬁc in Arms Regulations (ITAR).

14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"15","President ~ Greg Mungas
FIRESTARB @' ”I PM"" ‘ .\ WC'OUWW
650,610-612ng CEO-WW W-Adamwudon mm-mmg
° WBX"" IP 0 Prom: Management ° Manufacturing ° Business Development
' Yechnlcal Support ° Systems Engineering ° Thrust chamber design ° Project Management
° R&D ° Systems Integration ° Systems Engineeting
° Software Development
8: Simulation
° Contract Management
- Administration
(IQ ' Business Development
N
2
§.
8
E
*7 ISPS DPS
CD
2 M'geg 2' 'nrv'mr'n .‘;‘ WALL“ (v. l'wr QQ-PH‘g g')!""i!""?'xl’ IUVLPUIUI f\
8 .‘Ftvv'vsgf a :3 v' rvjr' tz'w.’ w 11.7145""; ,‘f,).:_)rvte'xfn:' US unit}!
E
g Figure 10. ISPH Corporate Structure
E: In parallel, the ITAR-restricted US defense market is being addressed by ISPH’s other subsidiary, Defense
g Propulsion Systems (DPS). DPS already has been approached and received contracts from both government
5 agencies and major defense contractors on programs including AFRL’s Reusable Booster System (RBS) and
8“ multiple teams for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Airborne Launch Assist Space
g Access (ALASA) small launch vehicle program. The strategic compartmentalization 0f the propulsion market
é between separate companies allows ISPH to independently pursue both defense and international ciVil markets while
8 minimizing ITAR restrictions and overhead.
ES
H 0
g IX. C0nclus10n
:3 There is widespread consensus amongst spacecraft manufacturers, end users and Regulatory agencies worldwide
95 that the use of hydrazine must be discontinued. NOFBXTM is unique amongst the few technologies posturing to ﬁll
E this void, because it not only meets the stated need for non-toxicity and environmental-friendliness, but does so with
m su erior technical erformance and lower costs. As the onl hi h- erformance alternative, NOFBXTM r0 ulsion
g P P y g P P P
9 technology is poised to begin displacing hydrazine-based propellants in many of its traditional applications. ISPS
(:3: and DPS have been formed speciﬁcally to usher this technology from prototype into production and commercial
a sales and are already executing contracts for government and commercial customers.
3; The long list of favorable characteristics of NOFBXTM technology speaks to the diverse range of potential
3 appllcatlons 1n the future, w1th th1s technology supplantlng eX1st1ng technology as well as enabllng m1ss10ns that are
g currently 1nfeas1ble.
8
References
lBartz, D. R. ""A Simple Equation for Rapid Estimation of Rocket Nozzle Convective Heat Transfer Coefficients,"" Jet
Propulsion. J anuary, p. 49-51, 1957.
21A. Bossard, N.O. Rhys, “Propellant Readiness Level: A Methodological Approach to Propellant Characterization”, AIAA
J oint Propulsion Conference; 25-28 Jul. 2010
31C. Mankins, “T echnology Readiness Levels, A White Paper,” Advanced Concepts Ofﬁce, Ofﬁce of Space Access and
Technology, NASA, April 6, 1995
15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
