"","x"
"1","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
DOI 10.1007/S12217-012-9315-8
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Nucleate Pool Boiling Experiments (NPBX)
on the International Space Station
Vijay Kumar Dhir - Gopinath R. Warrier -
Eduardo Aktinol - David Chao - Jeffery Eggers -
William Sheredy - Wendell Booth
Received: 5 December 2011 / Accepted: 13 J une 2012
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012
Abstract During the period of March—May 2011, a se- to the heater surface varied from 1.2 x 10—7ge to 6 x
ries of boiling experiments was carried out in the Boil- 10—7ge. The results of the experiments show that a
ing Experimental Facility (BXF) located in the Micro- single bubble continues to grow to occupy the size of
gravity Science Glovebox (MSG) of the International the chamber without departing from the heater surface.
Space Station (188). The BXF Facility was carried to During lateral merger of bubbles, at high superheats
188 on Space Shuttle Mission STS—133 on February 24, a large bubble may lift off from the surface but con-
2011. Nucleate Pool Boiling Experiment (NPBX) was tinues to hover near the surface. Neighboring bubbles
one of the two experiments housed in the BXF. Results are continuously pulled into the large bubble. At low
of experiments on single bubble dynamics (e.g., incep- superheats bubbles at neighboring sites simply merge to
tion and growth), multiple bubble dynamics (lateral yield a larger bubble. The larger bubble mostly locates
merger and departure, if any), nucleate pool boiling in the middle of the heated surface and serves as a
heat transfer, and critical heat flux are described. In vapor sink. The latter mode continues to persist when
the experiments Perﬂuoro-n-hexane was used as the boiling is occurring all over the heater surface. Heat
test liquid. The system pressure was varied from 51 to ﬂuxes for steady state nucleate boiling and critical heat
243 kPa, pool temperature was varied from 30° to 59°C, ﬂuxes are found to be much lower than those obtained
and test surface temperature was varied from 40° to under earth normal gravity conditions. The data are
80°C. The test surface was a polished aluminum disc useful for calibration of results of numerical simula-
(1 mm thick, 89.5 mm in diameter) heated from below tions. Any correlations that are developed for nucleate
with strain gage heaters. Five cylindrical cavities were boiling heat transfer under microgravity condition must
formed on the surface with four cavities located at the account for the existence of vapor escape path (sink)
corners of a square and one in the middle. During eX- from the heater, size of the heater, and the size and
periments the magnitude of mean gravity level normal geometry of the chamber.

Keywords Bubble dynamics - Nucleate boiling -
— Critical heat ﬂux - Microgravity
This work was initially supported under the NASA
Microgravity Fluid Physics Program.
V. K. Dhir (IE) - G. R. Warrier - E. Aktinol Introduction
Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA , , , ,
e-mail: thir@seas.ucla.edu At earth normal graV1ty boning is known to be a very

efficient mode of heat transfer, and as such, it is em-
D- ChaO°W- Sheredy ployed in component cooling and in various energy
NASA Glenn Reseamh Center, Cleveland’ OH’ USA conversion systems. For space applications, boiling can
J.EggerS.W.BOOth also be a preferred mode of heat transfer since for
Zin Technologies, Cleveland, OH, USA a given power rating the size of a component can
Published online: 19 July 2012 (E Springer

"
"2","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
be significantly reduced. Applications of boiling heat Using the bubble growth rate data, Keshock and
transfer in space can be found in the areas of thermal Siegel (1964) evaluated the magnitude of the forces that
management, ﬂuid handling and control, power sys- lead to the bubble departure. They noted that bubble
tems, on-orbit storage and supply systems for cryogenic departure was governed by the balance of buoyancy,
propellants and life support ﬂuids, and for cooling of surface tension, and inertial force. For slow growing
electronic packages associated with various instrumen- bubbles, buoyancy was balanced by surface tension
tation and control systems. Recent interest in eXplo- forces whereas for the fast growing bubbles it was
ration of Mars and other planets, and the concept of in- the liquid inertia and surface tension that determined
situ resource utilization on Mars highlights the need to the bubble diameter at departure. Thus it was found
understand the effect of gravity on boiling heat transfer that for fast growing bubbles, there was no effect of
at gravity levels of 1 Z g/ge 2 10—7. gravity on bubble diameter at departure, whereas for

Studies of boiling at low gravity can be grouped slow growing bubbles the bubble diameter at departure
into two periods- the studies that were conducted in increased as g‘l/Z.
the 1960s mostly at NASA Glenn Research Center Siegel and Usiskin (1959) studied nucleate boiling
and the studies that have been conducted during the on electrically heated vertical and horizontal ribbons
last three decades. In the earlier studies, single bubble under free fall conditions. During the free fall the plat-
dynamics (bubbles growth and departure) and nucle- form carrying the test section traveled about 8 ft. From
ate boiling heat transfer on ribbons and wires were photographic observations it was found that during the
studied. Although these studies provided valuable in- free fall vapor remained adjacent to the heated surface
sights to the phenomena, the duration of experiments and did not appear to push away from the heater sur-
at low gravity was only a few seconds and did not face. Subsequently, Usiskin and Siegel (1961) measured
represent quasi-static conditions. In the later studies critical heat ﬂuX on a 1 mm diameter platinum wire
boiling experiments at g/ge E 10—2 and g/ge g 10—4 under the low gravity conditions that lasted about 1 sec-
have been conducted for much longer durations of low ond. For gravity levels of 1 5 g/ge 5 0.04, it was found
gravity. However, these experiments have often yielded that observed critical heat ﬂuX was generally consistent
contradictory data and have not been able to provide with the g1/4 dependence given by the hydrodynamic
understanding of the phenomena up to a level that is theory while nucleate boiling data were comparable to
necessary for development of models or correlations. those obtained at earth normal gravity. Siegel (1967)
As such at present we neither have a basis for sealing of reViewed the reduced gravity boiling studies and con-
the effect of ﬂuid properties and gravity nor have cor- cluded that the effect of magnitude of gravity on nucle-
relations for nucleate and maximum heat ﬂuxes which ate boiling heat transfer is small. Referring to the work
can be used for design purposes. of Cochran et a1. (1966), he concluded that the mag-

Amongst the studies conducted in the 1960s, Siegel nitude of gravitational acceleration becomes even less
and Keshock (1964) studied the dynamic behaVior of important with liquid subcooling. It should be stressed
bubbles on an isolated site formed on a very smooth that although in studies prior to 1967, gravity levels up
horizontal nickel surface. The experiments were con- to 10—5ge were obtained, the duration of experiments
ducted for g/ge varying from 1 to 0.014, and saturated in reduced gravity was less than 7 sec. Transient effects
water at one atmosphere pressure was used as the test must have played an important role in the nucleate and
liquid. From the measurement of growth rate and bub- critical heat ﬂuX data obtained in these short duration
ble diameter at departure it was concluded that none of tests.
the correlations reported in the literature at that time Oka et a1. (1995) have studied pool boiling of n-
yielded predictions that were in agreement with data as Pentane, R-113, and water on transparent heaters un-
g/ge was reduced. Also, it was found that at reduced der parabolic ﬂight conditions. During the ﬂight, sig-
graVity, after a large bubble departed several smaller nificant variation of the gravity level occurred and only
bubbles growing at the same site were sucked into the for about 5 seconds, reduced gravity, g/ge, of about 0.02
larger bubble before the cycle repeated itself. Further- persisted normal to the heater surface. It was noted that
more, it was noted that bubble diameter at departure during stable nucleate boiling of n-Pentane and R-113,
and growth period increased with decrease in gravity bubble merger at the heater surface occurred by sliding
and the growth rate of the bubble at departure had of the bubbles along the surface. However in water,
some inﬂuence on the bubble diameter at departure. coalescence of bubbles occurred in the direction normal
However, the magnitude of gravity had little effect on to the heaters by suction of smaller, newer bubbles into
the contact angle which was found to remain nearly larger bubbles. The difference in bubble merger behaV-
constant during the growth period. ior for water and the two other liquids was attributed to
@ Springer

"
"3","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
differences in surface tension and wettability character- power was supplied to the wire. The vapor film was
istics. It was postulated that vapor/liquid/solid contact observed to pulsate and during receding period of the
behaVior attains significant importance at low gravities. vapor film front, a liquid film was deposited on the wire.
However, the authors reported no quantitative value Rewetting of the wire led to activation of nucleation
of physicalparameters (e.g.,contact angle) which could sites on both sides of the oscillating film. Conden-
be used to relate to the observed behaVior. During the sation at the vapor-liquid interface occurred and by
period of low gravity no bubbles were seen to detach Marangoni effect hotter liquid from near the wall was
from the heater surface. Nucleate boiling heat ﬂuxes pushed into the colder bulk liquid. For pure vapor,
under low gravity condition for R-113 and n-Pentane existence of Marangoni convection cannot be justified.
were found to be comparable to those obtained under Thus the authors postulated that there were some non-
earth normal gravity conditions. However, with water, condensibles in the liquid which, upon evaporation of
a substantial reduction in nucleate boiling heat ﬂuxes liquid, tended to accumulate at the outer edge of the
at a given wall superheat was found at the low gravity film. The accumulation of the non-condensibles caused
levels. All of the reported data were obtained for sub- local saturation pressure of the vapor to decrease and
cooled liquid with a liquid subcooling as high as 20 K. reduce the interfacial temperature. This mode of boil-
No critical heat ﬂux condition (CHF) was achieved in ing was termed as nucleate boiling and magnitude of
water, but CHF with n-Pentane and R-113 was found nucleate boiling heat ﬂuxes at a given wall superheat
to be about 40% of that under earth normal gravity was found to be comparable to that at g/ge = 1, under
conditions. similar subcooling conditions. On a ﬂat plate heater a
Abe et al. (1994) have studied pool boiling of a large vapor bubble occupying the whole heater surface
mixture of ethanol and water under free fall conditions formed upon nucleation. During the rapid growth of
of a drop tower. In the experiments, reduced gravity of the bubble, a foam of smaller bubbles was created in the
the order of 10—5 ge existed for about 10 seconds. It was thin liquid film held between the heater and the large
found that during boiling with this non-azeotropic mix- bubble. Also, it has been noted that a thermocapillary
ture, the nucleate boiling heat transfer coefficients were ﬂow existed from the base of the bubble to the top and
about 20% higher than those under normal gravity con- it lifted up the back of the bubble. Smaller bubbles were
ditions. Also, with 11.3% weight mixture of ethanol in observed to be present on the heater only when the
water, the critical heat ﬂux observed at 10—5ge, was only liquid was subcooled.
about 20—40% lower than that obtained at the earth In the parabolic ﬂights, when the gravity level
normal condition. This finding again suggests that for changed from low to high values, little change in the
these short durations of microgravity, the dependence heat transfer coefficient during nucleate boiling on
of critical heat ﬂux on gravity is very weak. From Visual a platinum wire was noted, although the size of the
observations it has been suggested by Abe et al. that bubbles was observed to shrink. A similar observation
the Marangoni effect along the bubble causes the liquid was made for the data obtained on ﬂat plate heaters.
to ﬂow into micro/macro layer underneath the bubble. To explain the lack of dependence of nucleate boiling
The inﬂow of liquid is also responsible for lifting of on the level of gravity, Straub has identified primary
the bubbles from the surface. The bubbles, however, and secondary mechanisms for nucleate boiling. The
continued to position themselves near the surface. At primary mechanism for heat transfer during nucleate
high heat ﬂuxes a double layer of bubbles was formed boiling is the evaporation of the thin film between the
on the heater surface with secondary bubbles sucking vapor and the heater surface. The ﬂow in the thin
the primary bubbles and enlarging themselves. film is supported by the capillary pressure gradient.
Straub (1994) has reViewed the microgravity boiling The evaporation ceases and a dry region in the central
heat transfer work conducted in his laboratory since portion of the base of the bubble is formed when the
1980. He and his co-workers have conducted saturated wall superheat is sufficiently high to dislodge the mole-
and subcooled boiling experiments in a drop tower cules attached to the heater surface. This qualitative
facility a ballistic rocket and in parabolic ﬂights. In description of the evaporation process is similar to the
the drop tower the duration of microgravity was about quantitative analysis performed by Lay and Dhir (1995)
10 seconds, in the aircraft 20 seconds, and in the bal- for fully developed nucleate boiling heat transfer. It
listic rocket about 6 minutes. Both electrically heated was noted that the evaporation of the microlayer is
wire heaters and ﬂat plate heaters were used in the mainly determined by capillary forces and as such is
experiments. During subcooled boiling of R-113 on a not inﬂuenced by gravity. The secondary mechanisms
horizontal wire in the ballistic rocket ﬂight (g/ge < were responsible for transfer of heat and mass from
10—4), a vapor film appeared to surround the wire once the wall to the bulk. These included mass and energy
@ Springer

"
"4","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
carried by departing bubbles, and convection induced ErVin et al. (1992) and ErVin and Merte (1993) have
by bubble motion and condensation at the top of the studied transient nucleate boiling on a gold film sput-
bubbles. Surface tension was claimed to be the domi- tered on a quartz plate by using a 5 second drop tower
nant force that led to merger of bubbles horizontally (g/ge E 10—5) at NASA Glenn Research Center. In the
and vertically, migration of secondary bubbles to larger experiments R-113 was used as the test liquid. From
bubbles, and lifting of larger bubbles by nucleation the experiments, it was found that time or temperature
of secondary bubbles underneath. In subcooled boil- for initiating nucleate boiling was greater for a pool
ing, Marangoni convection tended to hold the larger at saturation temperature than that for a subcooled
bubbles against the heater surface. No quantitative pool. They also noted the occurrence of energetic boil-
analyses to support these qualitative observations were ing at relatively low heat ﬂuxes. The energetic boiling
provided. However, it was noted that to develop aphys- in which the vapor mass rapidly covered the heater
ical understanding of boiling under microgravity con- was postulated to be associated with an instability at
ditions, basic studies dealing with boiling heat transfer the wrinkled vapor-liquid interface. Merte (1994) and
and physical processes associated with single bubbles Merte et al. (1995) have also reported results of pool
should be performed. The single bubble studies should boiling experiments conducted in the space shuttle on
include bubble inception, bubble growth, bubble dy- the same surface that was used in the drop tower
namics, evaporation and condensation around bubbles tests. Subcooled boiling under microgravity conditions
attached to the heater,bubble coalescence, and stability was found to be unstable. Because of a large step in
of dry spots underneath bubbles. power input to the heater, the heater surface temper-

Straub and Micko (1996) have reported results of ature rose rapidly. Nucleation generally occurred at
subcooled and saturated boiling of R-134a on 0.05 and higher superheats and resulted in bubbles that grew
0.2 mm diameter platinum wires uin the microgravity energetically. From analysis of the data the investiga-
environment of the space shuttle. Nucleate boiling heat tors found evidence of both quasi-homogeneous and
fluX at a given wall superheat was found to be higher heterogeneous nucleation. It was noted that long term
in microgravity conditions than that obtained under steady state nucleate boiling could be maintained on a
earth normal gravity conditions. The enhancement in ﬂat plate heater under microgravity conditions when a
the rate of heat transfer was higher for the thicker wire. large bubble parked itself a short distance away from
For saturated liquid, the critical heat fluX under micro- the heater and acted as a vapor sink. Also, from runs
gravity condition was lower than that at earth normal lasting a few seconds to up to about two minutes it
gravity; however it was much higher than that which was concluded that nucleate pool boiling heat transfer
would be predicted from the hydrodynamic theory. The coefficients in microgravity are higher than those at
liquid momentum created during bubble formation and earth normal gravity. No mechanistic explanation was
coalescence was attributed to lead to bubble departure given for this observation. Furthermore, because of the
from the heater. onset of dryout, the maximum heat fluX in microgravity

In another paper, Straub et al. (1996) have reported was reduced substantially.
results of bubble dynamics and pool boiling heat trans- These observations have been reinforced through
fer on a0.26 mm diameter hemisphericalsurface placed the results of two sets of recent experiments (Merte
in the BDPU (Bubble, Drop, and Particle Unit) facility. et al. 1998) on the space shuttle. Additionally, it has
This facility was carried in the space shuttle. Again, been noted that liquid subcooling enhances nucleate
little difference in the nucleate boiling data obtained boiling heat transfer in microgravity. A detailed review
under 1 g and ug condition was found. The critical of various studies has been reported by Dhir (2002).
heat fluX for saturated liquid under microgravity was In the present study of nucleate boiling heat trans-
found to be only 15% lower than that at 1 g. With R- fer under microgravity conditions an approach is used
11 nucleate boiling heat ﬂuxes as high as 90 W/cm2 such that while providing basic knowledge of the phe-
were observed under microgravity conditions. Bubble nomena, it also leads to development of simulation
dynamics was observed to change significantly with models and correlations that can be used as design
change in liquid subcooling, system pressure and wall tools for a wide range of gravity levels. In this study
superheat. Surface tension, wetting behavior of the liq- a building block type of approach is used and only
uid, bubble coalescence and liquid momentum during pool boiling is investigated. Starting with experiments
bubble formation was found to inﬂuence the boiling with a single bubble, the complexity of the experiments
process. Thermocapillary ﬂow was found to play an was increased to multiple bubbles placed on a two-
important role under subcooled boiling conditions. dimensional grid. A polished aluminum wafer was used
@ Springer

"
"5","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
as the test surface because on such a surface caVities minum wafer (6061-T6 aluminum alloy, surface rough-
of desired size and shape can be easily fabricated. In ness between 16—19 nm) with five artificial cavities as
the experiments, liquid subcooling and wall superheat the boiling surface. The aluminum wafer (shown in
were varied parametrically. The system pressure in the Fig. 1) was bent at the edge to join with the housing
experiments was varied over a narrow range around holding the wafer. The overall diameter is 89.5 mm
one atmosphere. In the experiments, the heater surface and its thickness is 1.0 mm. Five artificial caVities
temperature is to be maintained nearly constant by con- were etched on the heater surface using the Electrical
trolling power input to different regions on the heater. Discharge Machining (EDM) technique. Four of the
Data were taken for heater temperatures, power input cavities are located in the corners of a square (38.18 mm
to heaters and liquid temperature in the pool. Visual per side), while the fifth cavity is located at the center.
observations provided quantitative data on bubble in- Hence the diagonal distance between the central cavity
ception, bubble growth, bubble merger and bubble de- (denoted as cavity 1) and the other cavities (denoted as
parture processes. The data were obtained under nearly cavities 2, 3, 4, and 5) is 27.0 mm (see Fig. 1). Single
steady state microgravity conditions. bubble departure diameter predicted at 10—4ge, using
Modeling/complete numericalsimulation of the boil- numerical simulations, was used in deciding on the
ing process is an integral part of the experimental spacing between the prefabricated caVities.The spacing
effort. Scaling of the effect of gravity in the range 1 Z chosen was such that lateral bubble merger would occur
g/ge Z 10—7 has been a prerequisite for the model. A prior to departure when multiple nucleation sites are
quantitative comparison of data from experiments for activated on the heater surface. Each of the cavities was
bubble dynamics including bubble growth, merger and designed to have the following nominal dimensions:
departure process has been made. diameter ~ 10 pm and depth ~ 100 pm. However as it is
extremely difficult to precisely control the dimensions
of the caVities during the EDM machining process,
Overall Objective some variation in cavity dimensions are to be expected.
Based on inspection of the caVities it was found that the
Develop a mechanistic model for nucleate boiling un- cavity diameters varied from 16.3 to 17.6 nm. Figure 2
der microgravity conditions. The model is to be sup- shows a photograph of one of the etched artificial
ported by experiments on the 188. Use a building block cavities (D ~ 16.3 11.111).
approach to validate different components of the model
and increase complexity in steps.
Specific Objectives
19.139 mm ,1, _h_
. . . ,H’ “m, ,F 39.50 mm
0 Single bubble dynamics (nucleation, growth and ""w:
departure) under microgravity conditions under f a
constant wall temperature. _1_”_. 3 .2 “~\
0 Effect of liquid subcooling, wall superheat and sys- 19 [)5]; f :1
tem pressure on single bubble dynamics. ' mm ' ‘
0 Heat ﬂux variation on the heated surface durin | "" .‘i—ﬁmem 2
, , g a 210:} 111111 J
Single bubble evolution. '5, V"" If
0 Lateral merger of bubbles formed at neighboring \ 3'4 15 3;”
sites and mechanism of vapor removal from the 2H ER
surface. a f}:
TEE _ 3-H” Carat}!
Experiments Cain 1
NPBX Experimental Apparatus _i_ LEIUI mm
. . . . 5-35 mmﬁ=E%
The Nucleate Pool Boning eXperiment (NPBX) is one ?— __H__15ﬂ mm
of two experiments housed in the Boiling eXperiment
Facility (BXF). NPBX uses a diamond turned alu- Fig. 1 Schematic of the aluminum heater
@ Springer

"
"6","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
_ _ . .. _ - (called the caVity heater and labeled as ‘C’ in Fig. 3)
_ ' '-E' II ' ' .- . - and another surrounding it (called the surround heater
'_ "" ' I and labeled as ‘S’ in Fig. 3). In addition, there are
' ' . - ' ' __ .- '_ . two groups of background heaters (labeled background
-' -_ .I r. heaters ‘B1’and ‘B2’ in Fig. 3).The background heaters
I ' ..-_ .. _ ' are not directly associated with the caVities. These
'. _ _- _ -- _. "" _ heaters are used to heat parts of the wafer that are not
. ..-'.I ' _ = 3.‘ :2 heated by the cavity or surround heater groups. As such
' ' "" _ - ' '_ I . -' .. there were a total of 12 heater groups on the backside
- "" : : '-.- -..-_; '- :_ I of the wafer. In Fig. 3, each of the heater groups asso-
' I . -; I ' - _- - ' ciated with a particular caVity is identified by the cor-
Fig. 2 Photograph of an etched artificial cavity (D ~ 16.3 um) responding caVIty number; for example, heater groups
C1 and S1 are the caV1ty and surround heaters groups
associated with caVity 1 (center cavity), respectively.
The heating of the aluminum wafer was accom- The strain gages used in the experiment were manufac-
plished using strain gage heaters bonded to the back- tured by Vishay Precision Group. The strain gages used
side of the wafer. In addition, thermistors were also for the surround and background heaters are Model:
bonded to the backside of the wafer to monitor the EA-O6-250AF-120, which has dimensions of length 2
wafer temperature at several locations. The strain gage 11 mm and width 2 7 mm. The caVity heaters are EA-
heaters and thermistors are grouped such that each of O6-O62TT-120, which are dual gages each with a nomi-
the five caVities could be activated independently. na1 resistance of 120 Ohms (total length = 8 mm, total
A schematic of the strain gages and thermistors 0n width 2 7 mm).A11strain gages have are approximately
the backside of the wafer is shown in Fig. 3. The 0.05 mm thick.
strain gages were arranged such that each caVity had The arrangement of the thermistors 0n the backside
two groups of strain gage heaters associated with it; was similar to the arrangement of the heater groups.
one strain gage heater directly underneath the caVity For each cavity, one thermistor was used to measure
Fig. 3 Schematic of the strain
gage and thermistor
arrangement on the backside
of the wafer
“‘- ..
Tllmmstﬂr a
3‘!
- T5 ITS
I T]
1
1 IT? IT]
El
J
El IT'- rrg- 39.5mm
Cari 'le
t”
Camera 1
@ Springer

"
"7","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
Fig. 4 Schematic of heater Suitchw e! d 2116 Aluminum wafer
assembly
”6111111 5.3 mm
5‘ ""5:5: .525252321.-.i.3.*.!.1.1_1.u_ .:.:..: 2:2:2i-22-222: 2:223; 4 We: '2.2:2:2:2:2:::22:2: 2:::::22...:22:::2:2-2: :2-2: 222215;“
\E-E--:-E-:-::E:i:-:-E-E-:-E-E--:-E-§--.E-§-:-E-E-:-::§---:-E-:-E-:-:--:-:-:'--':5'31-11a1-{Ea--EE-:-E-E-E---§-§-:-EE-:--EE-:I:-§E 53 333 33 3123‘ 1111111111
\———I¥'
‘ -
a Smtchcast 251 / O [3.1]
Tllcrmistm'
the temperature almost directly below the cavity while the G-11 base. These thermistors were placed at dis-
another was used to measure the temperature of the tances of 5.3, 8.6, 14.7, and 24.5 mm from the bot-
surrounding area. With this arrangement, the temper- tom of the aluminum wafer. Lead wires soldered to
ature of each heater group was controlled by adjust- the strain gage heaters and thermistors were used to
ment of the power to the heater. For example, power connect them to the power supply and data acquisition
to heater group C1 was controlled using output from system, respectively. Note that the lead wires are not
thermistor T1, while power to heater group 81 was shown in Fig. 4. The backside of G-11 base was filled
controlled using output from thermistor T2. A similar with an insulating epoxy (3M Scotchcast 251 epoxy)
arrangement was used for the other cavities. Note that to a depth of approximately 19 mm. Hence three of
power to the background heater groups B1 and B2 is the thermistors in the G-11 base were embedded in
controlled using output from thermistors 12 and 11, the insulating epoxy, while the fourth was located in
respectfully. The 12 thermistors bonded to the backside the ﬂuid (just below the insulating epoxy). The tem-
of the aluminum wafer were manufactured by Omega peratures measured by the three thermistors in the
(Model: TH-44007-36-T). The maximum bead diameter insulation and the thermistor located in the ﬂuid were
of these epoxy encapsulated thermistors is 2.4 mm and used to estimate the heat loss through the backside of
they have a nominal resistance of 5000 ohm at 25 °C. the heater assembly. The four thermistors embedded in
Figure 4 shows the cross section of the complete the insulation were made by YSI (Model: 014-55034-
heater assembly. The aluminum wafer (with strain gage NA-IT-ST). These thermistors are glass encapsulated
heaters and thermistors bonded to the backside) was and have a maximum bead diameter of 2.4 mm. Their
bonded to a G-11 base using 3M Scotchweld 2216 nominal resistance is 5000 ohms at 25 °C. Figures 5a
epoxy. Four additional thermistors were provided in and b show photographs of the heater assembly. The
I __ .. _. Strain ”I
. 31.41131 ..-""-:_.'::h 3......” ;' 'r':_;.._..I_I‘IIIII‘ gage I ' ' . .f
. ,3? E ""‘W-ﬁE-ﬂri‘i
."" 113.3! €53"" _ I- _ n
I ‘i' 'I ' "" I .r r ,3. 1. I
II .I ‘EF. . -. ‘“ F.l‘:H
E '5- 1| . r: I' . r 55- .
L‘ I; I II -.I-:.. ,- t_r' ‘. 'l-.-'l "" .I .
""E .'+'!'_ '1 PT *‘T‘rrﬁ ‘.¢.}
1|. Twil 2“ LI _ I ""i I H) j.
IL ..--"" ﬁt”: 1-. -I ﬁt 'I. H . r i-
_ .1. .____I “I 3 1:11 IIrIT. 11-. ... I_
92} 1, ' 5““- ! - Thermistnr _ 1;, F 33"" - a
,3? """"‘ ‘“ 47am. "" . -- ' r _.;.. ..
2.11.”:1331‘ Hi"" I .2533 . . I‘: ' '1 2:: . 'I ._ .:.._
'"" ""-""t- .5,"" ,1. -""*.-' . .. _ -—‘—.-
gﬁmn-ﬁlniuh. q ?llaflfiilk ‘ 1' I II If t II
""J .IIIAII 1:51}. I -' - ' _‘.=_:_- i It. II - .'
(a) (b)
F ig. 5 Photographs of heater assembly a boiling surface and b backside
@ Springer

"
"8","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
top side of the wafer (boiling surface) is shown is Fig. 5a temperatures. Four sapphire windows are provided on
while the backside is shown in Fig. 5b before the back- the test section for Visual observation. Two cameras
side was filled with Scotchcast 251 epoxy. The strain (29.97 fps) are used to record two orthogonal Views of
gage heaters (with soldered lead wires) and thermistor the boiling process occurring on the aluminum wafer.
arrangement can be clearly seen on the backside of the The test ﬂuid is filtered, degassed Perﬂuoro-n-hexane.
wafer. The test chamber is made of aluminum and has

The schematic of the experimental apparatus is the following internal dimensions: height = 228.6 mm,
shown in Fig. 6. It consists of the test chamber, heater width 2 114.3 mm. Additionally, the test chamber has a
assembly, bellows, bulk ﬂuid heater and a pump. The square cross section (114.3 x 114.3 mm). The thermis-
heater assembly was located at the bottom of the test tors (#1 through #6) used to measure the bulk ﬂuid tem-
chamber. The pressure (measured using three pres- perature are located at distances of 168.7, 114.8, 112.0,
sure transducers) in the test chamber was controlled 66.5, 40.6, 19.0 mm, respectively, from the top of the
by changing the position of the bellows. The bellows aluminum wafer as indicated in Fig. 6. The bellows have
are controlled by external means to minimize any an effective diameter of 16.5 cm and an approximate
oscillations. The temperature of the ﬂuid in the test displacement volume of 690 cm3. As mentioned earlier,
chamber was maintained by the ﬂuid conditioning 100p four windows were provided on the test chamber. Each
which consists of the pump, three inline heaters (total window has dimensions of 80.0 x 80.0 mm. Two orthog-
power 2 180 W) and associated plumbing. The test onal windows are used for Visual observation (using
chamber is also provided with siX thermistors (labeled cameras 1 and 2), while the other two windows are
#1 through #6 in Fig. 6) for measurement of ﬂuid used for lighting. For safety considerations, the entire
Fig. 6 Schematic of test Gl‘ﬂTit‘i TE Ctﬂl‘
chamber ' _

1
|\\1r I
I i-
F—
Heater I
{130 W} .21 .3
Tf‘ﬂt chamber BEIID‘WS
2""?- 163 ‘3’ mm {69“ ff}
ﬂ
1 14. mm 1 12. m
66 5 mm —-
ﬂ""; £11] 6 mm
IF' ITI mm I
—
34mm Heater assembly
I_ﬂ
/ \ II m_4
Pumpk ""
1'“\-\_.—I-""'-J
@ Springer

"
"9","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
experimental apparatus is mounted inside a secondary On ground, prior to filling the chamber with the test
containment vessel. Figure 7 shows a photograph of liquid (Perﬂuoro-n-hexane), the ﬂuid was distilled us-
BXF located inside MSG onboard the 188. The data ing a custom built distillation facility. After distillation,
recorded during the NPBX experiments consists of the the liquid was degassed using a custom built degassing
following: setup. The degassing was continued until the measured
, , dissolved gas concentration was less than 20 ppm. The
(1) Pressure ,— at three locations , , test chamber was then evacuated and filled with the
(11) Bulk hqmd temperature _ at SlXiOCElthIlS distilled, degassed test liquid. The total dissolved gas
(111) Wafer temperature _ at 12 locations tration in the test 1i uid was below 100 m at
(iV) Insulation temperature — at four locations eﬁncen . . . . . q pp
e t1me of initial filling the chamber.
(V) Wafer power _ for each heater group (12 heater During preliminary tests performed on ground, the
, groups) , , , contact angle was measured from the bubble shape.
(V1) faeceleration levels _ in three orthogonal direc- The measured contact angle varied between 330—380.
ions
(Vii) Video — two orthogonal views
All data, except the acceleration levels, are recorded at Experimental Anomalies
a sampling rate of 20 Hz, while the Video were recorded
at 29.97 fps. The acceleration levels were recorded 1) Though the experiments were designed with negli-
aboard the 188 by the MicrograVity Acceleration Mea- gible content or dissolved gas, as the experimen-
surement System (MAMS) (low frequency data, low tal period progressed, the dissolved gas content
pass ﬁltered at <1 Hz) and the Space Acceleration increased with time and subsequently stabilized.
Measurement System (S AMS) (high frequency data, The maximum measured dissolved gas content was
sampled at 500 Hz and low-pass filtered at 250 Hz) about 740 ppm. The presence of dissolved gas
modules for the entire duration of the experiments. It changes the saturation temperature by 1-5 t0 6-2 0C
must be noted that the SAMS module located inside (depending Oh the system pressure). Additionally,
MSG was not operational. The M AMS module is 10- it also affected the nucleation characteristics sig-
cated in the US. Laboratory Module, Destiny, Express nificantly and 3150 the bubble dynamics when the
Rack No. 1. The MAMS module and the MicrograVity liquid was subcooled.
Science Glovebox (MSG) are located in the same bay, 2) Although precautions were taken to minimize/
with MAMS mounted on the ceiling and MSG located eliminate bubble formation at the edge, where
on the starboard side. The distance between MAMS the wafer was embedded into the base, numerous
and MSG is approximately 2.3 m. The wafer was ori- bubbles were observed at the edge. As a result of
ented such that the magnitude of the acceleration was variations in gravity, the bubbles were observed to
highest pointing towards and normal to the heater (2- move along the edge.
direction as shown in Fig. 6). No Vibration isolation 3) Contaminant particles were observed ih the test
platform was used in the experiments. liquid in spite of a filter being present in the ﬂuid
circulation loop.
4) When the vapor production rate was high, the
_ . E."" t E- _ - . bellows were unable to maintain constant system
WIT ' pressure. This was due to the slow movement of
-- w; ' 1} J ,5. _ 1:. , r; i the bellows.
' “WEI ‘ W4“! .\| 5) After about three weeks of testing, a major anom-
* h} _ h‘"" r' 1%.; I ‘ \\ 'I aly occurred. The anomaly was accompanied by
._ .. W I L . I a sudden drop in the voltage of one of the 24 V
E “I 1. . J/ t '_ buses. The faulty bus provided power to the liq-
f 15‘- i I i uid heaters, cavity and surround heaters as well
'""'*"" __ "" i;- as to heaters of the second experiment housed in
up . i J _ BXF (MicroArray Boiling Experiment, MABE).
_ / The voltage drop coincided with erratic readings of
_ .. -* pressure sensors and some temperature sensors.
’T—E 6) Fortunately the background heaters of NPBX were
Fig. 7 Boiling Experimental Facility (BXF) in MSG onboard powered by a second 24 V bus- AS a result, SUb'
ISS sequent to the anomaly, we were able to conduct
@ Springer

"
"10","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
several single bubble, bubble merger and integral boiling from occurring on the bulk liquid heaters during
nucleate boiling experiments. However, there were this process, the test chamber pressure is increased to
significant constraints on the range of parameters 202.65 kPa (2.0 atm., Tsat = 79.3 0C). As a result, the
over which experiments could be conducted. liquid is always subcooled (minimum liquid subcooling

is approx. 20 0C) as it is being heated by the bulk
Experimental Procedure liquid heaters. In the worst case scenario, if boiling does
occur on the bulk ﬂuid heaters, the vapor generated

Two different sets of experiments were conducted in on the heaters will likely condense as the bulk liquid
the NPBX setup. These experiments can be diVided is highly subcooled. The liquid is then pumped from
into (i) single and multiple bubble experiments, and the bottom of the test chamber through the inline bulk
(ii) integral nucleate boiling heat transfer experiments. ﬂuid heaters and back into the test chamber. The hot
In the single and multiple bubble experiments, single liquid is discharged close to the top of the test chamber.
and/or multiple nucleation sites were activated, with the Once the liquid has attained the required temperature,
goal of studying the bubble inception, growth, merger, the pump and bulk ﬂuid heaters are turned off. The
lift off processes and the associated heat transfer. On liquid is then allowed to settle for about 5 mins. before
the other hand, in the integral boiling experiments, continuing with the rest of the experiment.
the goal was to obtain the boiling curve on the whole During the liquid settling time, the various para-
surface by parametrically varying the test conditions meters for the particular experiment are uploaded to
such as wall temperature, pressure and bulk liquid the BXF controller. For single and multiple bubble
temperature. As such, no attempt was made in the experiments the input parameters include the follow-
integral experiments to systematically study nucleation ing: (i) test chamber pressure, (ii) temperatures of the
at specified sites. The experiments were conducted in different regions of the wafer, and (iii) nucleation sites
the temperature controlled mode rather than the heat to be activated, and (iV) temperature ramp rate at the
ﬂuX controlled mode. nucleation site. For integral boiling curve experiments,

One of the key aspects of the single and multiple the input parameters include (i) test chamber pressure
bubble experiments was the detection of bubble incep- (ii) initial wafer temperature and (iii) magnitude of
tion in the absence of Visual information. The follow- temperature increments and (iV) duration for which a
ing procedure was adopted to detect bubble inception. specified temperature was to be maintained.
The entire wafer is initially maintained at a prescribed Once these parameters are uploaded, the eXperi-
temperature. The temperature of the site to be nucle- ment is ready to proceed. The experiment is conducted
ated is increased linearly at a prescribed rate, which remotely with downlink of Video and data. The test
can be varied. The power to the caVity and surround chamber pressure is first set to the prescribed value.
heaters automatically adjusts to attain the specified The wafer temperature is then set to the prescribed
temperature. The temperature of the site is increased value. For single and multiple bubble experiments, the
until bubble inception occurs. When nucleation occurs, temperatures of the caVity and surround heaters asso-
the temperature at the site decreases. This decrease in ciated with the site(s) to be activated were increased
temperature is detected by the temperature sensors on until bubble nucleation occurs. During this process the
the backside of the wafer (underneath the caVity). The temperature of the rest of the wafer was held con-
time lag between bubble inception and the measured stant at the prescribed temperature. For the integral
temperature drop on the backside is approximately experiments, the temperature of the entire wafer was
one second. This was determined by syncing the Video increased by increments of 1—3 0C every 2 minutes. The
recordings and the temperature measurements. At this total time for each experiment was approximately 15—
point, the power to the caVity and surround heaters 20 minutes. At the end of each experiment, power to
associated with the particular nucleation site is auto- all heaters was cut off and the pressure of the system
matically cut off or reduced to maintain a prespecified was increased to 253.31 kPa so as to condense the vapor
temperature. Thereafter the entire wafer is maintained present in the test chamber. The typical time taken for
at the preset temperature. Note that, if desired, it is the vapor to condense was about 10—15 mins.
possible to maintain different portions of the wafer at The BXF controlled Video cameras are programmed
different temperatures. to automatically record two orthogonal Views of the

At the beginning of each experimental run the bulk heater surface during each NPBX experiment. These
liquid was heated to the desired temperature. The maX- Videos are recorded on Video tape at a frame rate
imum temperature to which the bulk ﬂuid is heated by of 29.97 fps. In addition, during the duration of each
the bulk liquid heaters is 59 0C. In order to prevent any experiment, the following data was recorded: (i) tem-
@ Springer

"
"11","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
T bl 1 T t t . .
b Data Reductlon and Uncertalnty
System pressure 2 51 kPa to 243 kPa in Measured Quantities
Test liquid temperature = 30 0C to 59 OC
Test surface temperature = 40 0C to 80 0C D R d ,
Mean magnitude of level of = 1.7 x 10‘7 to 6.0 x 10‘7 ge ata e uction
gravity normal to the wafer . .
Mean magnitude of level of = 1.2x 10-7 to 3.5 X 10-7 ge The power (Q) supplied to each heater group 1s calcu-
graVity in the plane of the wafer lated as,
Dissolved gas content 2 0 to 737 ppm 2
— Q = I R (1)
perature at various locations 011 the backside of the where I is the measured current and R is the resistance
wafer (12 thermistors), (ii) temperatures in the insu— Of the heater group. Note that the .cilrrent. supplied
lation (4 thermistors), (iii) bulk ﬂuid temperatures (6 to each heater group was recorded digitally 11.1 counts,
thermistors), (iV) current supplied to each heater group the counts were then co.nverted to engineering 111.11“
(12 heater groups), and (V) pressure at various loca- (Amperes) us1ng convers10n factors determined during
tions in the test chamber (3 transducers). All the data calibration. Tests conducted earlier (at earth graV1ty)
were recorde d at a sample rate of 20 Hz The gravita- have shown that the change in resistance of the heater
tional acceleration data from sensors in the MicrograV- groups 1s negligible for the range Of tengperatures en-
ity Science Glovebox (MSG) 011 188 was continuously countered 1n these experimerits (30—85 C)' The heat
recorded onboard the 188. These data are cataloged ﬂux (qw) 011 the wafer surface 1s calculated as,
based on date and time and were available for down- _ 2 Q _ Q10” (2)
load. Table 1 gives the range of the test parameters that qw _ Aw
were varied durin the eX eriments.
. g p . where 2 Q is the sum of the power supplied to each
The dissolved gas concentration was calculated at ,
regular intervals (typically once a week) during the heatergroup,Q1OSS accounts for all the losses, and AW IS
. . . the surface area of the wafer.
duration of the experiments. The dissolved gas concen- I d t d 1 d t d t , Q
tration was determined by the following procedure: (i) 11 or er 0 eve 0p a proce ure 0. e ermine 1055’
at a given ﬂuid temperature exten d bellows slightly so several steady-state natural convection experiments
as to set the pressure in the chamber to be between were performed, at earth normal gravity. In these tests
34 and 46 kPa (ii) calculate the saturation pressure an eneriylbalanctelwals ptertformfed. thier.mak1ngtt11111s
(for the given temperature) for the test ﬂuid using the energy a ance, e ea rans er coe 101en S 011 e
Antoine equation assuming it does not contain any top of the wafer and Side of the heater assembly were
dissolved gas (iii) calculate the difference between the determined from standard textbook correlations. The
. . heat loss at the edges of the wafer was accounted for
set pressure and the calculated saturation pressure (1V) ,
if there is a difference use Henry’s law to calculate by assuming that the unheated edge Of the wafer acts
the gas concentration of the dissolved gas. Note that as a fin. Based on the energy balance Perforrned, the
Henry’s law constant (_ 5 4 x 10_5) use d is the one effective thermal conduct1V1ty 0f the insulation (3M
measure d for air in 1:072 in the temperature range Scotchcast 251 epoxy) was determined. The thermal
31 O C to 60 O C 1:072 is the 1:072 is the commercial conductivity of the insulating epoxy differs from the
grade version of Perﬂuoro-n-Hexane made by 3M. The value given by the manufacturer because copper lead
. . . . . wires are embedded in it. These wires were used to con-
var1at10n 1n the measured dissolved gas concentration , ,
over time is shown in Table 2 Note that the NPBX meet the heater groups and thermistors to their respec-
experiments were con ducte d on. days 89—91 95_9 6 and tive control circuits. In performing the energy balance,
129433 ’ ’ the temperature of the wafer surface was assumed to be
' uniform (2 area averaged value of the 12 thermistors
Table 2 Measured dissolved gas concentration bonded to the backside of the wafer). The variations in
m the wafer surface temperature were small. For example,
W for the earth normal gravity experiments, the temper-
91 46:61 33:1 299 ature differences varied from i0.3 0C to i0.8 0C as
94 31.41 23.1 261 the power supplied increases from 18 W (AT 2 7.8 0C)
101 42.56 24.8 712 to 70 W (AT 2 20.9 0C), where AT 2 TW—Tl. For the
117 41.54 23.6 737 microgravity experiments, the temperature differences
129 37-49 23-1 589 vary from i0.2 0C to i0.4 0C as the power supplied
% varies from 2.4w (AT=8.6°C) t0 7.4w (AT=24.6°C).
@ Springer

"
"12","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
The effect of these small temperature differences is was held below the saturation temperature of liquid.
expected to be negligible. Once the effective thermal In the experiments heat flux was quite low as a result
conductivity was determined, a similar energy balance there is a larger uncertainty in the measured rate of
was performed for the microgravity natural convection heat transfer. Figure 8 shows the data obtained in
experiments to determine Q1033. It must be noted, that microgravity conditions. The characteristic length used
in order to determine the heat transfer coefficients at in defining Nusselt and Rayleigh numbers was taken to
the side of the wafer assembly in microgravity, the stan- be the heater area divided by the perimeter. Solid and
dard textbook correlation for natural convection on a dashed lines are the predictions from the correlation of
vertical plate was used with the appropriate magnitude Kobus and Wedekind (2001) and McAdams (1954), re-
of the gravitational acceleration. spectively. Stars are the data that were obtained during
The gravitational acceleration values reported in this calibration runs at earth normal gravity (Rayleigh num-
paper are the arithmetic average values of the gravity ber % 109) whereas solid triangles are the microgravity
levels recorded by MAMS at a frequency of 0.06 Hz. data (Rayleigh number % 102) which was obtained at
For example, for the single bubble case discussed in this the beginning of the experimental activity when all of
paper, the arithmetic and Root Mean Square (RMS) the heaters at the back of the wafer were energized and
values of g/ge are: X-aXis (plane of the wafer) — mean 2 only small variation in temperature eXisted across the
1.1 x 10—7, RMS 2 1.9 x 10—7; Y-aXis (plane of the wafer. These data with a Rayleigh number about seven
wafer) — mean = 2.1 x 10—7, RMS 2 2.3 x 10—7; Z-aXis orders of magnitude smaller than that at earth normal
(normal to the wafer) — mean = 2.5 x 10—7, RMS 2 gravity appear to be correlated well by Kobus and
2.6 x 10—7. Wedekind’s correlation. However, the data obtained
after the anomaly when only background heaters were
Uncertainty Analysis operational show large scatter and is generally higher
than that predicted by the correlations. One reason
For integral experiments, the temperatures measured could be that the thermal layer was still developing
at 12 locations on the wafer were area-averaged to when the data were taken.
determine the average temperature of the wafer. The
maximum and minimum temperature deviation from Single Bubble Dynamics
the area-averaged temperature was also noted. The
uncertainty ih the temperature measurements (wafer Several experiments were conducted to study single
thermistors, insulation thermistors and the bulk flu1d bubble dynamics at the center caVity as well as the
thermistors) is j:0.2 0C and the uncertainty in the surrounding caVities. During ramping up of the tem-
pressure measurement IS i1 KPa. The uncertainty Of perature of the test surface supporting the caVity and
the current measurement varied between 6—13 mA, the surrounding region, aside from the caVity a number
depending on the heater group. As mentioned earlier,
the change in the resistance of the heater groups in the
temperature range 30—85 0C was found to be negligible. 301::
Based on the measurement uncertainties given above, ,.
the uncertainty of the calculated total power supplied ma ”I
decreased from 17% to 0.8% as the power increased ,.
from 1.4 W to 200 W. Similarly, the uncertainty in the f, ,. I
calculated heat flux decreased from 26% to 1.6% as the ,. ,. ..
heat flux increased from 0.01 W/cm2 to 1.3 W/cmz. 1n :: V“ ,. "" ..
251.3 _
é .. ,m
Results and Discussion 1!} "" .. E
_. “E; —|{uhu5 E; Wedekind {EDDU
. 1 .. "" e - - - McAdams [1954}
Natural Convection "" 1|: Calibration Exmgigﬁ 1}
'1 Calibratinn Exp- {9ng - 1D"")
Prior to boiling experiments, a number of test runs . v.1: Integral Exp.{gfgc-v1ﬂ'?}
were performed to study the rate of natural convection :11 _
heat transfer under microgravity conditions. In these “3° 1‘31 1‘32 1‘33 10' 1'33 ""3'"" 10’ 10* We 101°
experiments liquid was subcooled and a uniform tem- Ra
perature existed on the wafer. The wafer temperature Fig. 8 Comparison of natural convection data with correlations
@ Springer

"
"13","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
of bubbles nucleated around the cavity. Upon Visual- 60.8 to 76 kPa. whereas the wall temperature varied
ization of the bubbles, the temperature of the heater from 48.2 to 51.5 °C. As a result, the liquid subcooling
region supporting the cavity was brought down to the varies from 5 t0 1 0C, while the wall superheat varies
temperature of the rest of the wafer. During this period from 4 t0 7 °C. At 178 seconds, the bubble has grown
the bubbles continued to persist 0n the surface while to about 67 mm in diameter and shows no sign of
sometimes merging with the bubble at the nucleation departure.
site. Eventually a single bubble at the cavity dominated Quantitative data of bubble equivalent diameter,
while supporting a necklace of smaller bubbles around defined as the diameter of a perfect sphere having the
it. Figure 9 shows bubble size and shape at different same volume as the bubble, are plotted as a function
times during the growth. During the experiment system of time in Fig. 10a. The variation of wall superheat
pressure was not constant. It steadily increased during with time is also shown. Figure 10b shows the variation
the first 100 seconds of the growth period. At 100 sec— of system pressure and wall temperature during the
ends wall temperature was increased to compensate for bubble growth. Using the liquid temperature and the
the increase in saturation temperature. As such during time dependent pressure, and wall temperature the nu-
the growth period of the bubble, pressure varied from merical simulation tool developed by Son et a1. (1999)
was exercised. In the numerical simulations, the area-
averaged heater surface temperature as a function of
time was given as input. N0 spatial variation of surface
temperature was considered for the single bubble cases.
The initial thickness of the thermal layer was obtained
1 from natural convection data. The solid line shows the
prediction from numerical simulations of bubble equiV-
I ' alent diameter as a function of time. The numerical
, model accounted for condensation at the upper part of
- the bubble and presence of dissolved gas in the liquid
( . (Wu and Dhir (2011)). The prediction from numerical
. I model is in remarkably good agreement with data.
I ' .;- «g! Figure 11 compares at different times the bubble shape
1:: 1551Daq= 21mm 1: 45 51 DIIIII= 41mm and heat flux under the bubble and surround area
predicted from numerical simulations with those 0b-
_ _ _ _ served in the experiments. It is found that numerical
1 1' simulations do a good job in predicting bubble shape
and size. In the experiments, due to the fact that the
_ spatial resolution is not fine enough (a number of
heaters are grouped together), the heat flux under the
bubble cannot be determined when the bubble base
is small and occupies an area larger than the cavity
- heater. However, if the bubble base occupies the area
covered by a bank of heaters around the cavity and
t: 90 5. DH] = 5n mrn t: 12051 D.” = 55 mm the heat input to the cavity and surround heaters is
_ _ zero, then the heat flux is zero. The results of numerical
1 simulations show that the heat flux at the bubble base is
. .. very small (approx. 4 x 10—4 W/cmz). Note that the dry
' . a ' "" area under the bubble base begins from the inner edge
III.. * -- - 0f the microlayer. However, experimentally observed
4 { heat flux 0n bubble unoccupied area of the heater is
I I I . about two times that obtained from numerical model
.5? 3-5 *- but at later periods the predicted heat ﬂuxes are compa-
” E; _ III - table to those observed in experiments. The numerical
- H ' model shows a peak in heat flux near the triple point.
t: 150 5' D9“ = 51 mm t: WE 5' D“ = 5? mm This peak is not observed in the experiments because
Fig.9 Single bubble growth for Tw =48.2—51.50C,T1=34.6OC, of lack of availability of fine resolution heat trans-
P = 60—78 kPa, gZ/ge = 2.5 X 10—7 fer data.
@ Springer

"
"14","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
Fig. 10 Comparison of single BE- 15
bubble growth data with ?D ' EIP- . 14
results from numerical Eﬂ Numencal 12
simulations H 5‘3 r- .— a
E m . . g“ 5,
BE 3:} ..EF
:1 2t} .- . - 5 «u
m ' . 4
D 2
D 2:] 4D an SD mu 12:} 14D 151:: 1313
85 54
ED 53
T5 52
gm ' 51 a
33,55 5:} E.
n. 5:} ,4 49 ﬁ
55 43
5D 4?
D 2!] 4D EU BU “1013 12!} 14D 1613 1311]
Time {5}
Multiple Bubble Dynamics existed during the experiment. Because of the occur-
rence of the anomaly after the third week of testing,
Merger of bubbles nucleating at different cavities was we did not get the opportunity to study interactions
also investigated on 188. Figure 12a shows two bubbles of more than two bubbles nucleating simultaneously at
formed at distinct nucleation sites prior to their merger. prescribed sites.
After merger a single bubble, as shown in Fig. 12b, Figure 13 shows a snapshot from a Video of bubble
forms and continues to grow. N0 premature bubble dynamics when severalbubbles merge. Visual observa-
departure, as a result of ﬂuid inertia created during tions showed that during initial merger of a number of
merger, was observed at the low wall superheat that bubbles nucleating at the heater, a bubble may detach
t=155 t=ﬁﬂs t=lﬁﬂs
”.2 _ ____ .\ — - . . \ ..— _-_ -._ _- _ _ .._.
q=57d q=5T¢l q=5T4
WICHIE “’1“ch 1""an""""a-r.|'l::IIl1
"":5: 0.1
E
11:: -'
«4:: -3n -zn -1n a 1n 2:: an 4a 4D -3D -2D -1n a 1n 2:: an 4-3-45 4m -2cr -1n a 10 2|: an 40
r {mm} r [mm] r {mm}
Fig. 11 Comparison of experimental data with results from numerical simulations
@ Springer

"
"15","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
F ig. 12 Two bubble merger,
gZ/ge = 3.2 x 10—7
4'
f’ ’ C ‘ .
/ I: i""
(a) (b)
and depart away from the heater. However, subse- Three-dimensional numerical simulation of merger
quently a large bubble forms in the middle of the wafer, of five bubbles was carried out prior to the experiments
while smaller bubbles are continuously pulling smaller on the space station. Figure shows a snapshot of the
bubbles into it. Radial motion of smaller bubbles to
the middle of the wafer was seen before these bubbles ,r' / \\ H.
were pulled into the large bubble. The radial motion ' f 'f f \ h t '
of smaller bubbles is caused by the radial movement of ‘ ‘ ' f R I K "" ' '
the downﬂowing liquid. At higher superheats the larger .. ~. ‘I K \ / II I' I .
bubble was found to lift off from the heater surface but r __ I...“ \ / f __ ..
continue to hover near the surface while pulling smaller ‘\ /""
bubbles into it. This vapor removal configuration con- "" ""- h- _ 'ﬂ """" ‘
tinues to persist even when nucleate boiling occurs all I - - I
over the wafer. Thus during boiling under microgravity ' '
. . . I I / \ x I
condltlons we see that the vapor s1nk (bubble layer) I | I _. I
eXists on the surface or slightly away from the surface as I"" \ A / f
opposed to low gravity conditions where single bubbles "" 1“ K“ -. _. f I ‘
detach from the heater surface and move away from it. 1 ‘x “"" [I A \ """" f i
I - '- / ""I \ - r I
'l. 1. ""- f / Ii. \ ‘5‘ -' r I'
._ I 'I- 1 I / I. i II \ 1‘ r r I
. I ., x a _. . .
I I H"" :5. i, f I I
I w -' ‘- w I
. ___ __ , L-Iz' 1.. \ AV , \ _/ II
.‘ a \ ii / \ E"" {,1 x
F ig. 13 Multiple bubble merger — experiments, gZ/ge = 4.5 x 10—7 F ig. 14 Multiple bubble merger — numerical simulations
@ Springer

"
"16","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
process. After initial merger, a vapor bubble leaves the Fig. 15. The dependence of wall heat flux on wall super-
heater surface and is seen moving through the pool. heat is found to depend strongly on system pressure and
Subsequently a large bubble detaches from the surface liquid subcooling. This behaVior is somewhat similar
while continuing to hover near the surface. Smaller to that found at earth normal gravity. As mentioned
bubbles move radially inward and are pulled into the earlier, the integral experiments were performed both
larger bubble. It is gratifying to note that these pre- before and after the anomaly occurred. In spite of the
dictions made a priori are in good agreement with the fact that all the experiments were conducted in constant
observations from the experiments as described above. temperature mode, there are temperature variations on

the heater surface as indicated in Fig. 15. The band in
the data represent the variation in temperature that
Integral Experiments eXisted over the wafer surface. Note that the boiling
curves for P = 145 and 164 kPa were obtained when all
A number of experiments were conducted on 188 when heaters were operational (i.e., before anomaly), while
all of the surface was heated. Several of these eX- the data for P = 63 and 84 kPa were obtained with only
periments were conducted after the significant anom- the background heaters operational (i.e, after anom-
aly developed. In these experiments only background aly). As seen in Fig. 15, when all heater are operational,
heaters were operational and as a result variations in the temperature variation across the entire heater sur-
temperature across the heater were enhanced. Results face is small (5:03 to 5:07 0C). On the other hand,
for natural convection are given in Fig. 8 and were when only the background heaters are operational, the
discussed earlier. temperature variation across the heater is large (5:1.3
Dependence of wall heat flux on wall superheat is to 5:37 0C). It is also important to note that in the
shown in Fig. 15, when boiling eXisted all over the wafer high pressure (P = 145 and 164 kPa) test cases boiling
surface. The reported data are for pressures varying was initiated by ramping up only the temperature of
from 164 kPa to 63 kPa and for liquid subcoolings the caVity and surround heaters to initate nucleation at
from 14.6 to 5.2 °C. As mentioned earlier, when the all five caVities. The temperature at which nucleation
vapor production rate is high the bellows were unable occurred is also shown in Fig. 15. Subsequent to nu-
to maintain constant pressure. As a result, for the data cleation, the temperature of the entire wafer was de-
reported in Fig. 15, the pressure (and consequently sat- creased to the preset temperature. Once quasi steady-
uration temperature) increases as the wall temperature state conditions were achieved the data was recorded
increases. The pressure for each data point is shown in and then the entire wafer temperature was increased
Fig. 15 Nueleate boiling in 2
microgravity 1?5.1
1 155.5 W155. 1—53’3'0 9,119 55.2
H_' 152.2 53"" I
155.? 133—1 E
152.5 55.5
I—i—I'll——————;—1————. 31
$55 449 52.5
5‘31“ 555
f? H 155.5 / I—i';5—}l—'—4 CHF
51-“ F—Ik—I-II---- ------'1lr
E /
E Q12 _
E 131-1 €55 Nucleatmn
g h.
:1- 1'12""
55.1
:- 51m = 5.2 '11: #311 :H
I 5.wa = 9.? ”C 5‘1” %
5 5.13le =15-1”5 E E
I 5.wa = “14.6 ”C “1' 112:.
13.131
1 a 1D 20
Tw ' T55t ( C}
@ Springer

"
"17","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
in steps to obtain the boiling curve. Due 0f the fact it. In either case, the vapor sink is located on or close to
that boiling was already initiated on the wafer using the the heater surface. In contrast, at higher gravity levels
ramp up procedure, boiling could be sustained at low (g/ge 2 10—2), the bubbles lift off and move away from
wall superheats. In contrast the low pressure (P = 63 the heater. The fractional area of the heater surface that
and 84 kPa) boiling curves were obtained by steadily is dry (vapor) is much larger at lower gravity levels as
increasing the wall superheat over the entire wafer. compared to that at higher gravity levels, which results
The nucleation temperature in these tests is higher but in a decrease in the overall heat transfer rate. Thus we
generally consistent with that found when temperature conclude that as level of gravity is reduced by about two
at a given site was ramped up. At pressures of 84 kPa orders of magnitude from that in space shuttle, boiling
and 63 kPa, onset of critical heat ﬂuX condition was process becomes less efficient.
noted When a sudden rise in temperature occurred Maximum or critical heat ﬂuX normalized with that
without any appreciable increase in the input power. at earth normal gravity is plotted in Fig. 17 as a function
Thereafter, the experiment was terminated. Prior to of dimensionless gravity level. Solid line is the pre-
termination of the experiment no change in the vapor diction for Perﬂuro-n-hexane from the hydrodynamic
structure on the surface was noted. theory corrected for liquid subcooling at a pressure of
Present nucleate boiling data are comparedinFig.16 72 kPa, whereas dashed lines are the predictions for
With the previously reported data obtained on the space R-113 at 120 kPa. Filled circles and diamonds are the
shuttle by Lee et 31- (1998) and $“an (2001), With R' data of Straub and Lee et a1., respectively, obtained in
113 as the test liquid. In Fig. 16, the mean pressure the space shuttle with a gravity level g /ge g 10—4. The
(F) during nucleate boiling is noted for the present observed critical heat ﬂuxes are found to decrease as
study. It is seen that for the same wall superheat the the gravity 1eVe1 iS decreased. The magnitude Of the
present data correspond to lower heat ﬂux, In micro- critical heat ﬂuxes observed in microgravity is gener-
graVity conditions and low wall superheats, the bubbles ally higher than that predicted from the hydrodynamic
generated on the heater surface stay on the surface for theory indicating a weaker functional dependence on
a long time and merge together to form a large bubble gravity. However, it should be noted that special atten-
at the center of the heater. At higher wall superheats, tion needs to be paid to the relative size of the heater
the large bubble formed as a result of merger of smaller and the chamber containing the heater aside from other
bubbles lifts off and continues to hover just above the experimental conditions before we can generalize the
heater with smaller bubbles continuously merging with results.
Fig. 16 Comparison of m J
nucleate boiling data with Present study {939.3 ""' 1U 15
that reported by Lee et a1. PerflucrrU—n—Hexane
(1998) and Straub (2001) l I 5.wa = 5.2 GB
‘x l «Hm = 9.?
.* Partial dryuut ""I: ﬂwa = 10-1 DC
1 i ii? i 1wa =14.5 “C
“A . i -' Lee et al- (1993} {gige = 10‘)
E {a i i ' H113,P~120 kPa
E E ' - CHF r3 Hm = 0.3%:
a “a” t I :1 1T =11_1‘“C
D.— it.- Sub
:11 g iv Hm = 22-2 ”c
m: Straub {2mm} {9ng = 14:14}
R1131F' - 34 kPa
I ' a .1wa = n ”C
$3 3% a ij =1? ”C
Hi ”i 1&- 'J'Tsub = 43 DC
{1.31
[1.3 1 10 a “100 EDD
Tw ' Tim I 01'
@ Springer

"
"18","Microgravity Sci. Technol.

Fig. 17 Comparison of 100 . _

critical heat flux data with

predictions from

hydrodynamic theory JD

* 1
551
R113 .
P = 12D kF’a .
I - Perﬂu0r0-n-Hexane
0* ’v P = ?2 kPa
*5“
0-:
f: 10‘1 9
I
LJI
1'3""
""-.LL _.
C515 I Present 0tu011.r {gig -1D""}1[F’nH}
nnm = 12.2 — 10.0 *0
I Lee 3: Marie {1933} {0ng =10 *1 {R1 13]
ATM = [LE —11.1”C
Q E30300 {2001} 1:910“ = 10*} {R1 1311
11'5”“ = 0.0 *0
1 DE '1"" 1 D
10* 10' 10* 10* 10* 10* 10* 10' 10
gige

Conclusions 0 Observed heat ﬂuxes for nucleate boiling are lower

compared to earlier data obtained on space shut-

. Intended experiments on 188 were fairly successful. tle. Functional dependence of heat ﬂux on wall
However, anomalies that developed resulted in ac— superheat is found to show strong dependence on
quisition of limited data. pressure and liquid subcooling.

0 Single bubbles were observed not to depart from 0 Observed critical heat ﬂux is higher than that pre-
the heater surface except occasionally bubbles were dicted by the hydrodynamic theory extrapolated to
found to depart from the edge of the wafer. Lack microgravity.
of bubble departure is consistent with predictions 0 Aside from experimental conditions, rate of nu-
from numerical simulations. cleate boiling heat transfer will be dependent on

0 At low wall superheats lateral merger of bubbles relative heater size and ﬂuid confinement. As such
led to a single bubble that continued to grow on the one should be extremely careful in extrapolation of
heater surface. results from normal and low gravity experiments to

0 At high superheats after merger bubble may lift off microgravity conditions.
from the surface but was found to continue to hover
over the surface while pulling smaller bubbles into
it and growing in size. This is consistent with pre-
dictions from numerical simulations. References

0 During nucleate boiling the above mode continued _ _ _ _
With a large bubble sitting in the middle Of the Abe, Y., Oka, T., Mori, Y.H.,.Nagashima, A.: Pool honing of

f d 11. 11 d. b bbl a non-azeotropic binary mixture under m1cr0grav1ty. Int. J .
.51“ 396 31} Pu mg sma er surroun mg .11 65 Heat Mass Transfer 37, 2405—2413 (1994)
Into lt- Thls large vapor bUbble aCted as a Slnk for Cochran, T.H., Aydelott, J .C., Frysinger, TO: The Effect of Sub-
vapor generated on the heated surface. cooling and Gravity level on Boiling in the Discrete Bubble

0 Rate of natural convection heat transfer in micro- _ Reglon» NASA TN D3449 (1966) _ _

't . f d t b . t t 'th th t b t . d Dhir, V.K.: Belling under micrograV1ty conditions. In: Proceed-
graV1 y IS 0111.1 0 e 90?“ en W1 . a O aine ings of the 12th Int. Heat Transfer Conﬁ, Grenoble, France
by extrapolation of eX1st1ng correlations. (2002)
@ Springer

"
"19","Microgravity Sci. Technol.

Ervin, J .S., Merte, H.: Boiling nucleation and propagation in Siegel, R.: Effects of reduced gravity on heat transfer. Adv. Heat
microgravity. In: Proceedings of Symposium Heat Transfer Transf. 4, 143—228 (1967)
in Microgravity, New Orleans, LA, ASME HTD, vol. 269, Siegel, R., Keshock, E.G.: Effects of reduced gravity on nucleate
pp. 131—138 (1993) boiling bubble dynamics in saturated water. AIChE J . 10,

Ervin, J.S., Merte, H., Kellers, R.B., Kirk, K.: Transient p001 509—517 (1964)
boiling in microgravity. Int. J . Heat Mass Transfer 35, 659— Siegel, R., Usiskin, C.: A photographic study of boiling in the
674 (1992) absence of gravity. Trans. ASME J . Heat Transfer 81, 230—

Keshock, E.G., Siegel, R.: Forces Acting on Bubbles in Nucle- 236 (1959)
ate Boiling under Normal and Reduced Gravity Conditions, Son, G., Dhir, V.K., Ramanuju, N.: Dynamics and heat transfer
NASA TND-2299 (1964) associated With a single bubble during nucleate boiling on a

Kobus, C.J., Wedekind, G.L.: An experimental investigation into horizontal surface. J . Heat Transfer 121, 623—631 (1999)
natural convection heat transfer from horizontal isothermal Straub, J .: The role of surfaced tension for two phase heat and
Circular disks. Int. J . Heat Mass Transfer 44, 3381—3383 (2001) mass transfer in the absence of gravity. Exp. Therm. Fluid

Lay, J .H., Dhir, V.K.: Shape of a vapor stem during nucleate Sci. 9, 253—273 (1994)
boiling 0fsaturated1iquids.J. HeatTransfer 117, 394—401 (1995) Straub, J .: Boiling heat transfer and bubble dynamics in micro-

Lee, H.S., Merte, H., Chiaramonte, F.: P001 boiling phenomena gravity. Adv. Heat Transf. 35, 58—172 (2001)
in microgravity. In: Proceedings of the 11th Int. Heat Trans— Straub, J ., Micko, 8.: Boiling on a Wire under microgravity condi-
fer Conference, Kyongyu, Korea, V01. 2, pp. 395—399 (1998) tions first results from a space epxeirment performed in May

McAdams, W.H.: Heat Transmission, 3rd edn. McGraW-Hill, 1996. In: Eurotherm Seminar - 48, Paderborn, Germany,
New York (1954) 18—20 Sept 1996 (1996)

Merte, H.: P001 and ﬂow boiling in variable and microgravity. In: Straub, J ., Picker, G., Steinbichler, M., Winter, J ., Zell, M.:
2nd Microgravity Fluid Physics Conference, Paper No. 33. Heat transfer and various modes of bubble dynamics on 3
Cleveland, OH. J une 21—23 (1994) small hemispherical heater under microgravity and 1G con-

Merte, H., Lee, H.S., Keller, R.B.: Report on P001 Boiling EX- dition. In: Gorenﬂow, D., Kenning, D.B.R., Marvillet, Ch.
periment Flow 0n STS-47, STS-57, STS-60, Report No. UM- (eds.) P001 Boiling 2. Eurotherm Seminar - 48, Paderborn,
MEAM-95-01 (1995) Germany, 18—20 Sept 1996 (1996)

Merte, H., Lee, H.S., Keller, R.B.: Dryout and rewetting in the Usiskin, C.M., Siegel, R.: An experimental study of boiling in re-
pool boiling experiments flown on STS-72 (PBE-IIB) and duced and zero gravity fields. Trans. ASME J . Heat Transfer
STS-77 (PBE-IIA), Report No. UM-MEAM-98-091 (1998) 83, 243—253 (1961)

Oka, T., Abe, Y., Mori, Y.H., Nagashima, A.: Pool boiling of Wu, J ., Dhir, V.K.: Numerical simulation of dynamics and heat
n-Pentane, CFC—113, and water under reduced gravity: par- transfer associated With a single bubble in subcooled boiling
abolic flight experiments With a transparent heater. J . Heat and in the presence of noncondensables. J . Heat Transfer
Transfer 117, 408—417 (1995) 133, 041502-1:041502-14 (2011)

@ Springer

"
