"","x"
"1","-. Ir: ,_
. l. Hatnnd ﬂH-ﬂnaﬂiﬁﬁ and M
_ . r. 1; 5 - . . 3mm AdnrnLEiratrzn gr""
. '3 ‘ i '
ﬂﬂa mmmn M - t -
F .I ""-2.. 1:; In H F..-""'F;_r __ 1.. a
3% 5533th“? hi. 1H, ._ ___  1 :9
_ n f: f if.- .. :1!"" ' f1 1_ . .p
Nuia‘ﬁmn ~ _» (W
_ mill: in“ .T ‘ Hi."" I. , Erf': L - 1h!)
a u .
‘h i . F'l'r' tlfﬂj‘ . i 'h'
531312!“ M. fﬁl'l‘lith 1i $9” ,1 I i} I
Sara: 3 .f=.-'-.Id1't _ '- __ rh- §_ . J"". £-
?.iﬁriincz Hear III. L -""'-"" E- ‘ E I ,
E . 1- -
' I v a“ .. ""33"""" . .i:.- ""r. f
. _ .' . . . .. #1. I
.' . . 4' 1 ', . i..- 1-. _
_ 'Jhu \N“ -1
Q; fl“ . :;. -""'~_ 9F! - 1_ . I
': 1: ?“Ij I! ""' SEE A,” -:-'. .h‘-‘l—I:_ .
""' ' ”1-244 . ”K. a ..
{'13 liJ - ig. _ . ._ j; if r
_ "" :‘ ‘ ?""I . Mir. Ii
. - m _ .

"
"2","—_ [Wt _
H. 1 i
1 .
I f =2 w
11‘} 11'- 1"""": '- l. ""4 J
- 'J- In
. 51 I'M“) '1 .
:J'E'H‘ -. ‘Qu'l R-
v§ . 1""“ ' '1‘
F ‘. h. ‘E
If‘ 1"": .' .lr .
§ 1} '1
t j .._}.I*:.
. «A
i. .F-
I . l u:
E 5} 'r.
hi"" Ihr
. WM».- - ._
1]; #53. .,
'4,

"
"3","N t' IA t' d '
a'g’szceizrnﬁzigizzzn
HUMAN ADAPTATION TO SPACE FLIGHT:
THE ROLE OF NUTRITION
Scott M. Smith
Nutritionist;
Manager for Nutritional Biochemistry
Nutritional Biochemistry Laboratory
Biomedical Research and
Environmental Sciences Division
NASA Johnson Space Center
Houston, Texas USA
Sara R. Zwart
Senior Scientist; Deputy Manager
for Nutritional Biochemistry
Nutritional Biochemistry Laboratory
Biomedical Research and
Environmental Sciences Division
NASA Johnson Space Center
Houston, Texas USA
Martina Heer
Nutritionist
Adjunct Professor of Nutrition Physiology
University of Bonn
Institute of Nutritional and Food Sciences
Bonn, Germany

"
"4","I' E .'I-'- i“:-
' 1' :.'-:i ”:i'a-
. .‘ ' .;
'1' : ' i __
Ii-iﬁ * F -a' .
'-‘:-' |'-""':-- 1'7 ..
:.I‘.-. -| _':-:E': 17-. i; - _
"" . ?.IJ _.. _
§-
' '- .1; . a ?a-
:.' :-|. :' _' '_'|'.
I. 1“- _..-~11. 4-2--
-- Il'lrl'l 1... '59... :.'.“ 1*. '1':
“h... i _.u; I.‘ '- III . Ir _ 1-. _
l... L'Fn‘ﬁh l l .,H _.. L {._
52!. -‘l""'; . i'll: .-""1--....h_ _
n; - 3-"" _.mL -~ :5 5:1-
.' 3' : E E 'i 'I'-'- ‘ﬁﬂ 1.3?!"" ""II-lpf 1.. ' ' _ 1"" 'ﬁft“
-: -'. ‘ T.”- '=-:'- _' ~- I"":' ‘ "" . . -' - ‘ _ ..+ I_
.I':.| .E. I - -_ - h"" 5“. _ .1,
' -- || .1'_' ~-.— . _. 5
-' 2' T-T 5:: _ 'i I
"" 3-.4 g:
4 5;— Z I
. IE'—_ :3
'__ :: 'E

"
"5","Table of Contents
Preface iv
1. Introduction1
Conducting Nutrition Research on ISS 2
Blood Collect|0n2
Urine Collect|0n3
Biological Sample Stowage and Return 4
Food Intake Momtormg5
Body Mass6
2. Energy and Fuel Metabolism7
Energy Expenditure and Reqwrements 7
Energy IntakeB
Implications for Inadequate Energy IntakeQ
Carbohydrate 13
Fat (and Fatty Acids) 14
Cofactors in Energy Metabolism 15
3. Muscle and Protein 17
Protein Intake 17
Vitamin Ba 18
Muscle Loss and Protein Turnover in Microgravity 18
Ground Analog Studies19
Muscle Loss Countermeasures....................................................................................21
Mechamcal21
Pharmacological 22
Nutritional25
Protein and Bone 26
4. Bone29
Bone Loss 29
Bone Metabolism 3O
Bone Loss Countermeasures.......................................................................................31
ExerC|se31
GraVIty35
Vlbratlon35
Pharmacological Agents35
Nutritional Countermeasures 36
|

"
"6","Nutrients and Bone Health 37
CaIC|um37
Vitamin D37
Vitamin K40
Phosphorus40
Magnesmm41
Zinc (and Lead) 42

Unique Aspects of Calcium and Space Flight42
Urine Processing and Water Reclamation 42
Natural Calcium Isotope Composition of Bone 43

5. Iron and Hematology45

Won.uuuuu”uuuu""uuuu”uu”u”uuu""uuu""uuu”u”uuu””uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu45

Copper 48

6. Cardiovascular Health51

Energy5‘l

Magnesmm53

Ongoing and Future Research 53
Oxidative Stress53
Omega-3 Fatty ACIdS54
Healthier Diet354

7. Sodium, Potassium, Fluid, and Renal Stone Risk 55

Sodium and Chloride55

Pota33|um58

Renal Stone RlSk61

8. Space Flight Ophthalmic Changes and Nutrltlon63

Ophthalmic Changes63

One—Carbon Metabolism63

Folate65

Vitamin B1266

Biotin 67

Vitamin A67

9. Immune Function, Inflammation, and Nutrltlon71

Energy |ntake7‘l

Protein and Amino ACIds7‘I

Vitamin D72

||

"
"7","Vitamin B1273
Sodium73
Vitamin A74
Vitamin C74
Vitamin E 74
Copper 74
Polyphenols75
Won.uuuuu”uuuu""uuuu”uu”u”uuu""uuu""uuu”u”uuu””uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuu75
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids 76
10. Antioxidants and Oxidative Stress77
Hypoxic Conditions77
Extravehicular ActIVIty77
Reactive Oxygen Species and ExerC|se 78
Radiation Exposure78
Oxidative Damage Markers During Space Flight and in Ground Analogs 79
Antioxidants and Related Nutrients: Selenium, Vitamin E, Vitamin C 79
11. Pharmacology and Drug-Nutrient Interactions 83
Supplements versus Whole Foods83
Dietary Factors84
Metabolism of Nutrients85
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 86
Antacids and Proton Pump Inhibitors 86
Summary of Pharmacology and Drug-Nutrient Interactions........................................86
12. Summary87
13. Appendices 89
References 89
Authors and Editor 131
Acknowledgments 132
Nutrient Intake Data 134
List of Figures135
AbbreVIatlons14O
|||

"
"8","Preface
Our first effort at compiling a book took place in 2009. The product of that effort is
available for (free) download through the link http://go.nasa.gov/QS1KW1. That initia|
effort came from a push within the NASA Human Research Program to have eaCh of
the disciplines or ""Elements"" comprising the Program prepare an “evidence report”
describing, as thoroughly as possible, “everything” known about the discipline (in our
case, Space Nutrition), including gaps in our knowledge that needed to be filled before
we could take the next steps of exploration. Details were provided to allow definition of
space flight requirements, and to that end, the text of the Space Nutrition book included
basics of nutrient metabolism and requirements on Earth, and much of the available data
related to space flight. Because, to a degree, the format was thrust upon us, and the
timeline was short, the 2009 book reads a little like an encyclopedia.
The current volume is not a second edition of that first book, but rather an evolution.
It is our hope that this book reflects a (brief) review of the history of and current state
of knowledge about the role of nutrition in human space flight. We have attempted to
organize this from a more physiological point of view, and to highlight systems, and
the nutrients that support them, rather than the other way around.
The other main difference between the 2 books is that a tremendous amount of work
has been completed and published in the past 6 years, including many reports of
ground-based studies and International Space Station (ISS) flight research findings.
New risks to human health have been identified, including one related to vision Changes
in astronauts on ISS. We oIetaiI herein data suggesting a tie-in of the folate- and vitamin
B12-dependent ‘I-oarbon metabolism pathway with these changes. Recent publications
have documented the effects of good nutrition and heavy resistance exercise on bone
metabolism during space flight. After more than a half century of human space flight,
this is the first evidence of the ability to mitigate the loss of bone mineral density in
astronauts on long-duration missions. Although more work remains to be done, any
progress is incredibly exciting.
We hope we have captured in this book the state of the field of study of the role
of human nutrition in space flight, along with the work leading up to this state, and
some guideposts for work remaining to be done and gaps that need to be filled.
‘-
0 I
r;,~f-: .. g
l - r * ""-. .
'l I s

"
"9","i Introduction
The importance of nutrition in exploration has been documented repeatedly throughout
history, on voyages across oceans, on expeditions across polar ice, and on treks across
unexplored continents. Scurvy is a prime example of exploration-induoed nutritional
discovery. While most people understand that scurvy is associated with vitamin C
deficiency, and that this was an issue for sailors centuries ago, few realize the magnitude
of this problem. If one examines the roughly 400-year period between Christopher
Columbus’ voyage in 1492 and the invention of the steam engine, scurvy resulted in
the deaths of more sailors than all other causes of death combined (1). Ships that sailed
with a crew of hundreds often returned with tens. It is estimated that more than 2 million
sailors perished from scurvy during this time (1). A key difference between these difficult
journeys and future space exploration is that astronauts are not likely to find food along
the way. Thus, understanding the nutritional requirements of space travelers and the role
of nutrition in human adaptation to microgravity are as critical to crew safety and mission
success as any of the mechanical systems of the spacecraft itself.
There are many facets to nutrition and health on Earth. Space flight introduces further
complications, and many gaps remain in our knowledge of the relationships between
nutrition and health in space that need to be filled before we can safely embark on
“exploration” missions, that is, missions beyond |ow Earth orbit. At the surface of these
unknowns is the need to understand and define basic nutrient requirements during
extended stays in microgravity. Beyond this lies the need to Characterize the role of
nutrition in the adaptation of physiological systems to microgravity, and/or the impact
of these Changes on nutrition. Additionally, environmental impacts (including radiation,
and spacecraft and spacesuit atmospheres) can alter nutritional status and nutritional
requirements of space flight. For surface missions (on, for example, the moon and Mars),
partial gravity may complicate the situation further. Finally, many potential targets for
nutritional countermeasures exist, where modified dietary intake may help to counteract
or mitigate some of the negative effects of space flight on the human body.
In 2009, at the urging of NASA’s Human Research Program, the authors published a
book (2) with the aim of reviewing the existing knowledge and history of human nutrition
for space flight, with a key goal of identifying gaps in the knowledge base required to
provide confidence that the risk of an inadequate food system or inadequate nutrition
to support humans on expeditions to the moon and Mars is as low as possible. A brief
history of space programs and space food systems was also included. This volume is
available for free download through the link http://go.nasa.gov/QS1KW1.
What we have attempted to provide here is not a second edition, but rather an updated
overview of space nutrition from a more physiological perspective. |ts division into
chapters is based on physiological systems (eg, metabolism, muscle, bone), and
highlighted in each Chapter are the nutrients that are particularly associated with that
system. We present data from ground-based analog studies, conducted in laboratories
on Earth by exposing human subjects to one or more environmental conditions similar
to those produced by space flight. While bed rest may be the most common analog of
space flight, recent nutrition research from Antarctica and undersea habitats has helped

"
"10","expand our understanding of nutritional changes during space flight simulations. We will
also review space flight research, including data from now-historical flights on the Space
Shuttle, as well as the Russian space station Mir and earlier space programs such as
Apollo and Skylab missions. In recent years, the International Space Station (ISS) has
provided (and continues to provide) a wealth of nutrition findings from flights of 4 to
6 months, and these will be reviewed in detail. We also present a brief overview of
the techniques used for conducting this research on orbit.
Key areas of nutrition concerns are primarily nutrition- or nutrient-related Changes,
including loss of body mass and depletion of body nutrient stores because of
inadequate food supply, inadequate food intake, increased metabolism, and/or
irreversible loss or degradation of nutrients. Physiological Changes that involve nutrition
(to some degree) include bone and muscle loss, cardiovascular degradation, impairment
of immune function, and neurovestibular changes. Vision Changes have recently been
identified in ISS crewmembers, and are a major (if not the major) health concern for
long-term space missions (3). Environmental issues, including radiation exposure and
cabin environment (02/002, temperature, and humidity) can have profound effects on
nutrition, and/or may provide areas where nutrients may serve as countermeasures.
When crewmembers are outside the spacecraft (that is, on spacewalks, or extravehicular
activity), the spacesuit becomes a spacecraft as well, with associated concerns (high
oxygen exposure, limited water availability, inability to eat for up to 8 to 10 hours at a
time while in the suit). Drug-nutrient interactions are of concern on Earth, and take on
added importance during space flight. We will review all of these areas in general, and
in detail with respect to the role of nutrition and specific nutrients, highlighting existing
knowledge as well as gaps where additional research is needed.
Conducting Nutrition Research on ISS
Blood Collection
The first crew of ISS took up residence there in November 2000, but the turning point for
nutrition research on ISS came in 2006, when the capability for collection, processing,
and frozen storage of blood and urine samples was brought to orbit. Crewmembers are
trained in procedures and use of the equipment required, and depending on the planned
crew complement and schedules, many are trained for autophlebotomy, that is, drawing
their own blood. In October 2006, early in the Expedition 14 mission, Mike Lopez-Alegria
collected the first blood samples to be drawn on ISS and captured the image (Figure 1).
After they are collected, samples are allowed to Clot, and are then centrifuged (Figure 2).
__., ‘ ""'- - V Figure 1. Mike Lopez-A/egria collects the
: ' _- ' ' - first blood sample on the International Space
.__ _ , I 5 ti q Station on October 5, 2006, having inserted
J __ --5 the needle himself. The collection tubes can
‘"" - J‘ . be seen (one in hand, the others in elastic
~ ' ,1 -. ‘ . "" __.__- bands on his be/tassemb/y), along With a
“1.; ‘ T . _ _ sharps container and detailed procedures
“‘""tj I If it (both Velcroed to the wall). He had set
' . the camera to automatically take pictures
.‘r f .5! - i .- periodically, snapping this one in the process.
'9- ‘ '

"
"11","_ _ . — :.- Urine Collection
:‘j ' -"" “I W“ m u
i 4 —-=_|I:t :3 “m Urine is collected by using urine collection
_..._._""'| ' -'- "" devices, UCDs (Figure 3; Figure 4). A UCD
. '_ Wﬁﬁ is essentially a bag with a one-way valve on
_! F‘s""; I. - . . one end, allowing urine entry while voiding,
.1 "" E_ L ——""— c; i and a port at the other end to withdraw
_ r _-_ ; nun syringe samples. Each void, typically over a
i 1, __ EFT“, E 24-hour period, is collected in this manner,
_ T _ _— _ I'JT' - and 2 or 3 syringes are used per void to
' ' ""— _'-' ' i withdraw about 6 to 7 mL of urine. Before
.3;- -i .--l flight, a small amount of lithium chloride
' :l .. . _. . ' ‘5': solution is added to the bags, and after the
""-.' ‘ 5&3 . _ ' void is complete, the UCD is kneaded to
. 5:: __ ____...-i I; _ facilitate mixing of the LiCI with the void.
It ‘-:_'*-'-'- trim; . After the samples are returned to Earth,
Pﬂ—J‘L , .1 l ; the lithium concentration is determined,
"" _""-""'—-: ' to allow back-calculation of the urine void
Figure 2. The refrigerated centrifuge on ISS. volume so that 24-hour pools may be
created from the individual voids.
_. l, -. 'T‘ig -- "" gr
-. ,. . 1-.- v- _ _,. _ .-— __..1_ , -
l"" :- ff. ""ah 1,-1— i.‘ E. ' ' ' rg- -.|""'!."": I .1.-.
'ﬂﬂ .ﬁ. . :
I .3! ‘3‘} '- _ 1' ﬁlth! _ _ iii H ""'._:'-.I ii I I. M
- - . t 1 - . ,.
i - h - _- Ih‘ - III. I 1“ . -'|I. I I. . ‘_ 1n: I-l
I '11 : _:_ IF?"" I —'__ —:_I i I f': _I |
.- —--'- —— ' r s...
Figure 3. Left: Urine Collection Device (UCD), shown here With a syringe on the collection port,
and a female adapter. Right: a UCD With a male adapter shown floating on ISS.
‘12-'13 . ‘. m ' ' - After the syringes are collected, the UCD
.-:""J""'""'-' ”I r is placed in a ziplock bag to provide another
' -' ' .. _ layer of containment, and the ziplock is placed
"" -... a Q n: 'E in a urine containment bag (UCB, Figure
., Eﬁ- "". k -_ -' . 5). Typically, after the day’s collections are
- ""e.“""E’; 1 complete, the UCBs are stowed for eventual
- _ disposal with other ISS trash. Most trash is
' ~ discarded in departing cargo vehicles that are
1"" 1:"" - not designed for reentry (that is, they burn up
' coming back through the atmosphere). Before
_ '-.l i the Space Shuttle was retired in 2011, some
' .. trash was brought home on Shuttle vehicles.
'1 \ Figure 4. Sunita Williams shown here
i.- ' :1 With a UCD, contained in a zip/ock bag
' : --' .- ' - to provide another/ayer of containment.

"
"12","Biological Sample Stowage and Return
The other key piece of hardware launched '
to ISS in 2006 was the freezer, the minus-
eighty (degrees) laboratory freezer for ISS,
or MELFI. There are currently 3 MELFIs -:::-__.
on ISS, to allow increased stowage volume ' 3 ._ T
for intervals between returns to Earth. "";'_._
Each MELFI has 4 dewars (doubIe-walled "" "" ft,
containers). On the outside of the MELFI,
the dewars are covered (Figure 6 shows
a crewmember opening the lid of one of Figure 5. Urine Containment Bag, used for
the dewars). Each dewar has 4 trays, Which holding discarded UCDs until they can be
are pulled out to store samp|es (Figures disposed Of along With other trash from ISS.
7-9). The MELFIs are primarily designed
for ultracold storage (temperatures 1' m ..._ __ 1
lower than -80°C), and typically maintain - ﬂ . - _ 'i -
temperatures close to -96°C. They are - ' _ ' "" ""1"" . i"", ' 21;, ’7
capable of refrigerated storage as well; 11%- .._ "" 1%; T ""I :g-ﬂr-
typically one of the 4 dewars will be at .' -1 . J i. """"5-1 ' - - 1'l.
refrigerator temperature, while the others ' - ”=4 1“ '
will be at -96°. £11111? ""‘- ' 3. . _
:- - -
._""illl ' . -' E‘ﬁl } ’ -
' 5; _ _ - i???.fi
H "" 11"" II 1 Figure 6. External view ofa MELFI, showing
I . ' _‘_"": . . ‘T' the covers for the4 dewars.
{a = ‘ - ' Whenever possible, samples are returned
$11,. to Earth. The Space Shuttle was the only
. '- ' ride home for frozen blood and urine
. - samples before its retirement in 2011.
Figure 7. External view of a MELFI, showing the On the flrSt few return fllghts, samples
interior of one of the dewars, With 1 tray partially were transferred frorn the MELFIItO
removed. The 2 urine syringes to be placed in Double COId Bags (Flgure 9)’ Wh'Ch
the freezer can be seen Velcroed to the wall. r . _ _ _

t... :t-r - . 7‘.- st.
'- . . 1| I ._r I . -,. . 1*1H1J _ h _J'iL ,r 13.11;?
: hill. f“; {”1 3-... I- 2*

.I 1,.“ ﬁ '3 n."" _g. 1| -' -. 1'"" '1 ii
I.” I IL: I' 1'. ""'- '- . '1'"". I 1-"": I ‘1 ﬂit}, ""1 1'- . ' '
_I w: a .ﬁ... HM f. _
L "" ' Figure 9. Crewmember Greg Chamitoff
Figure 8. Closer view of the MELFI tray, With (left) can be seen With the MELFI tray under
compartment open for sample insertion. his right hand, performing sample transfers
The mesh bags are designed to contain the from the MELFI into the Double Cold Bag
samples from a given blood collection session. (Sandy Magnus has her hand inside the
Blood samples are shown in this image. DCB in this image).

"
"13","included specially designed ice packs to maintain samples in a frozen state (specifically,
at a lower temperature than -30°C) from the time when samples were taken out of the
MELFI through the time when they were received at the landing site, usually 2 to 3 hours
after landing. The ice packs would maintain required temperatures for more than 125
hours. This duration was required because the Space Shuttle usually stayed on orbit
for 1 to 2 days after undocking from ISS, and could potentially be held up from landing
because of weather issues at landing sites for another 1 to 2 days. On many sample
return flights, in addition to the Double Cold Bags, a powered -96°C freezer is also
flown to increase the volume of returning samples.
Since the retirement of the Space Shuttle, the only space cargo vehicles that have been
able to return payloads are the SpaceX “Dragon” capsules. Other cargo vehicles exist,
but they are only designed to bring supplies and equipment to ISS, not to return them
to Earth. Thus, these other vehicles will burn up in the atmosphere on return, by design.
The SpaceX capsules splash down in the ocean off the coast of California.
Food Intake Monitoring
Methods of recording food intake have evolved over the course of human space flight.
On Skylab missions, which included metabolic balance studies, crewmembers called
down daily to mission control and reported any off-nominal intake for the day. When it is
required for specific research protocols, detailed dietary intake data has been obtained
through written food intake logs or even with barcode scanning. Baroode scanning often
seems an attractive alternative, but it comes with its own set of issues when used during
space flight. Not all space foods have barcode labels on them, or for many commercially
packaged items, the label is not in the database on the reader, and thus item information
won’t display on the screen. Additionally, many of the space foods do not have flat
surfaces on their packaging, and wrinkles in the label can be difficult for the barcode
reader to detect.
It was determined during the Shuttle-Mir program that for long-duration missions it
would be valuable for flight surgeons to have a means of having the crews easily, and
quickly, report typical dietary intake. To this end, a Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ)
(Figure 10; Figure 11) was
_ designed with the goal of
-',—__ I‘ ' ' - -—_ . having crews report typical
""i '1 j intake once per week, with
Pi] . -——.-— a computerized questionnaire
'. w that would take 5 to 15
‘ -- minutes to complete. The FFQ
_. -. ‘ ' ' was designed to report 6 key
______-..--r-""'"""" '_ nutrients: energy, fluid, protein,
' calcium, sodium, and iron.
_ ' . Later a seventh nutrient,
' potassium, was included as
\ well. The development, testing,
and data from the FFQ have
Figure 10. Peggy Whitson with the opening screen of been reported (4-6)' Although
the Food Frequency Questionnaire. After a crewmember some crewmembers
enters name or initials, the second screen opens with a list expressed concern over the
of food categories, under each of which is a list of food accuracy Of a 7-day recall
items grouped together according to nutrient content. questionnaire, the FFQ had

"
"14","_ - .qLJ'I-l several things in its favor:
ﬁﬁ— :I—n W -
' L’"" L'“ W' m"" the ISS food system IS
”1.........................................................._....._............ ‘ rather limited, the portion
Dr-u'I-inﬂm WHHIW WWM m.ﬁll-Ifri-IM .
““3“” SIZGS are known, and
P.IJIIﬂ |.I'I.I|IIII ll'IrIII'I-II'II'I'IJu'l'II '— -
the available foods
ﬁlli- u-lupph-mu-n Fmdtqh-‘l-Iﬂ-i mum [— . .
repeat WIth a high rate
mhdumwwmtmm.mummmm .
mm .n... Wu“ of frequency (WIth a
f-F-p-ﬂli'll-I-I'rr'l-Iﬁl Mill!!!“ ﬂ'III'I-II-‘ﬁ'I'IﬂI-I'II-I-nhh-ﬁl-l WWW -I:-I-I-I:J'- .
w r menu cycle of 8 to 11 d).
:ﬁtwﬁffjﬂfﬁw_ _ _ '— While this text was being
ms“ t“ written (2013-2014) an
WWW!- .
mem.w-Wm¢ I— developed for pOtentlal
GlﬂfﬂpJI-Iﬂl-Ihhlm |— ﬂight to '88. DUbbed the
41mm...“ ISS Food Intake Tracker,
wamwﬂﬂdﬂwmm'tmmmw """"""w r- it has the purpose of
Figure 11. A screen shot from the Food Frequency enapllng crews to more
Questionnaire. Available foods are grouped according eaSIly and accuraté'y
to key nutrient content. Shown here are 2 groups: “Fruit” eollect complete dletary
and “Beans, Soups. ” The foods provided by the European Intake data, In SUPPOVT
Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the Japanese 01‘ both medical
Aerospace Exploration Agency, and NASA are Shown in black operations and research
font, and foods provided by Russia are shown in blue. experiment purposes.
Body Mass
Determining body mass is one of the most basic overall measures of health, as
noted every time one visits a physician’s office on Earth. Determination of “weight” in
weightlessness, however, presents some unique challenges, as described in a recent
report (7). There are two devices on ISS: a Body Mass Measuring Device, which uses
spring oscillation, and a Space Linear Acceleration Mass Measuring Device, which uses
the physics of the equation: force 2 mass x acceleration. Images of the two devices
available on ISS are shown in Figure 12.
' lh- II - Figure 12. Karen Nyberg E '5 _ """"
?F:_— '__“__""__'_;_i_ (left), Expedition 36 ' #. i I
-- ' . y; ' “.a—u' '- _ - Flight Engineer, using .- -- —- _—.
__..- 11.-.3“??? '_._ _ ' the Space Linear “a — '
. -' .—'- ' ' ' . -' _ _ Acceleration Mass 1} J... 1 1r ""
c: .5. ""E“ . Measurement Device. f ij.’
§_ Tom Marshburn 'l1___5 - '7' t f
.It_ . I ..1 r' ht, E ed't'on -‘-= i- a
._I, __ h} ._ _ -t'..=—- .. ngI). hxp {I 13.)}: _..|. . .* ll” .- .
}. ' i . lg tEng/neer, _.,____ I I“ ah. - _ _ .-
'* 7""“! '. ‘ using the Body Mass ,""1-""'. . 5‘ r ,' ' 'r.__,__
- '- '- ‘ - Measurement Device. ' '15“: 51:53“ E} ”'
Photo credits: NASA. ' - . ' .- i'
.r ,- _-—— _— l‘._F-_.____1 :!
- . . -' | ._
_ _ .I . ‘Ik __ "".__ f:
ﬂ is: q ' P - I: : EL""£ ll:
.- tun'l :1; “'- . L1“:

"
"15","ﬂ Energy and Fuel Metabolism
Adequate energy intake is perhaps the single most important aspect of astronaut
nutrition. This is not only because energy in and of itself is more important than other
nutritional factors, but also because if enough food is consumed to meet energy needs,
then generally other nutrients will also be consumed in reasonable amounts. There
are many facets to maintaining eucaloric intake during space flight, including energy
requirements; physiological Changes in taste and satiety; scheduling issues of allotting
time for meal preparation, consumption, and cleanup; food quality; and even food
availability.

Little research has been done on differences in fuel components (protein, carbohydrate,
fat) during space flight, or on cofactors (eg, vitamins) of energy utilization. We review
these here, highlighting what has been done and potential areas of future research.
Energy Expenditure and Requirements

Energy expenditure is often hypothesized to be lower during flight than on the ground,
because of the presumed relative hypokinesia in space (8). An early example of this is
that lower energy expenditure was observed during extravehicular activity (EVA) on the
lunar surface than during similar activities at 1g (9). This was determined through indirect
calorimetry in the space suit. However, Space Shuttle crewmembers during EVA did not
have any Change in energy expenditure relative to before flight (1 0).

Studies of total energy expenditure of Shuttle astronauts documented that in-flight
energy expenditure was unchanged from preflight levels (11), or in cases where these
orews performed intensive exercise during the mission, energy expenditure during

flight was higher than before flight (12). For these studies, the douny-Iabeled water
(water enriched with deuterium and 18O) technique was used to determine oxygen
consumption (13). The benefits of this technique are that it is noninvasive and it takes
into account the energy cost of all activities over a period of several days. The drawback
of the method is that information about the individual components of total energy
expenditure (TEE), such as resting, sleep, and exercise, is not available. The range of
differences between preflight anol in-flight TEE makes it important to have information
about the components of TEE. Although it is assumed that moving the body mass
around the cabin requires less expenditure of energy during weightlessness than at

1g, other metabolic activities, such as maintaining resting metabolic rate and responding
to stress, may require increased energy expenditure during weightlessness.

|n ground-based bed rest studies, an analog of space flight, resting energy expenditure
did not Change, but TEE was less during bed rest than before bed rest (14). Because
TEE during flight is unchanged (11) or increased (12) from preflight levels, the lower

TEE during bed rest may indicate that bed rest is not an appropriate model for studies
of energy metabolism during flight. One possible explanation for this difference between
bed rest and space flight is the lack of a metabolic response to stress during bed

rest (15). Attempts have been made to improve the utility of bed rest studies by
administering a metabolic stressor (such as triiodothyronine or cortisol) to provide

"
"16","a better ground-based model than bed rest alone for the metabolic effects of space
flight on energy and fuel metabolism (16).
Energy requirements are typically estimated using standard equations, including the
World Health Organization (WHO) (17) and Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) (18), using
a “moderately active” or “active” adjustment for activity level for these 2 equations,
respectively. The DRI equation includes the effects of age, sex, weight, and height in
estimating energy requirements. While it would be more accurate to determine actual
resting energy expenditure before flight for each astronaut, this testing has not been
possible except in cases where these data were required for specific experiments.
The aforementioned studies of energy expenditure on Space Shuttle missions were
performed on flights of 10 to 14 days’ duration. The objective of a European Space
Agency (ESA)-sponsored experiment initiated in 2012 is to determine energy expenditure
during 6-month missions to the International Space Station. These data will help us
understand whether any adaptation effect occurs on these longer missions, and thus
may be important in estimating energy requirements for exploration missions (missions
beyond low Earth orbit).
Energy Intake
Historically, inadequate energy intake and subsequent body mass loss have been
considered hallmarks of space flight, and have occurred on many missions and
programs (2, 4, 6, 11, 19-27). From Apollo through the Shuttle program, crewmember
dietary intakes during flight averaged about 70% of predicted requirements (6), and ISS
intakes have averaged about 80% of requirements (Figure 13). There are exceptions to
this finding, including the Skylab missions of the early 1970s (28, 29), European flights
to the Mir space station (30), and more recently some of the ISS missions (31). In the
Skylab and Mir examples, crew participation in metabolic experiments has required
consumption of balanced,
controlled, eucaloric diets.

11a
Asaresult,crewmembers met gm“ ___ ____________ _.
their recommended energy E g“
intake requirements. It is E 30
difficult to determine whether E- m
the intakes on Skylab were E '5“
related more to the requirement 3 5“

4|]-
to consume the food or to E 3“
the fact that the food was 5 2“
more palatable because of E 1n
the additional variety available E II 1.
with frozen foods;lhowever, f 43? 9f #5 gr"" $25?
Increased palatability IS .5? a?
ObVIOUSIy benefICIaI. Figure 13. ln-f/ight dietary intake of crewmembers
The International Space Station in different space programs. Data are expressed as
has accommodated 4— t0 percentage of energy requirements predicted by the
6-month missions dating back World Health Organization (17) and are mean i SD.
to 2000. During this time, many ggg‘; [\1/82/33 §???9N32i} SQ??? N = 32é_;\ﬂirN = 7’
- - - = , - = . = eXpe I Ion.
ﬁzsgijocijetges:dr2:30elserCise Apollo and Skylab data are from Beur/and et a/ (32).
_ _ Figure IS adapted from earlier publications (2, 33),

eqU'Pment’ reformu'at'ons 0“ with additional published data included (6, 31, 34).

"
"17","many space food items, and international foods from all partner agencies have debuted.
These factors, coupled with the passage of lessons learned from one crew to the next,
may have been responsible for our observation that many ISS crewmembers now
consume recommended dietary intakes of energy, and also maintain body mass (6, 31).
In cases where energy intakes do not meet requirements, absent definitive causes,
many potential explanations have been proposed (8, 23, 35). Anecdotal reports

of appetite vary significantly, as indicated in a Russian study in which 40% of Mir
crewmembers reported decreased appetite, 40% reported no Change, and 20%
reported increased appetite (36).

Food palatability is occasionally reported as a cause of reduced in-flight intake, and
many anecdotal reports exist of Changes in taste and aroma of food during flight
(37-39). One hypothesis is that fluid shifts and congestion associated with the first

days of microgravity can alter taste and odor perception. Other possibilities exist as
well, including effects of atmospheric contaminants, stress, radiation, and psychological
factors (37). Experimental research has not been able to Clearly document Changes in
taste or olfaotion during space flight or head-down-tilt bed rest (37, 40, 41), but it is
hoped that ongoing ground-based anol in-flight research on ISS will provide clarity.
When tongue taste perception was measured before, during, and after a 30-day

—6° head-down bed rest period, subjects reported decreased appetite and lack of

taste early in the bed rest phase (41, 42). By day 13 of the bed rest phase, for all tastes
(sweet, salt, acidic, bitter), the threshold for taste sensitivity had increased. In contrast,
a bed rest study in the 1990s found no Changes in odor or taste perception after 14 days
of head-down bed rest (43), suggesting that multiple factors are likely involved in this
process. Additional studies of taste and smell Changes during bed rest are ongoing,

and will help expand the evidence base for this area.

Flight-related Changes in gastrointestinal function may also occur. Fluid shifts, in
combination with reduced fluid intake, would tend to decrease gastrointestinal motility.
Gastrointestinal transit time has not been systematically studied during flight, but during
10 days of —6° head-down bed rest, mouth-to-oeoum transit time was significantly
longer than it was during ambulatory control periods (44). However, because the Skylab
astronauts and others were able to maintain a eucalorio diet in space, hypotheses about
inability to consume the requisite amount of food because of stomach fullness or other
factors are not likely to fully explain decreased dietary intake during flight. Russian
studies of gastrointestinal function during actual and simulated space flight, in humans
and in animal models, have previously been reviewed (45). A common cause of reduced
dietary intake during the first days of a mission (46) is space motion sickness (39, 46-49).
The effects of space motion sickness typically pass after the first several days of flight,
but the decreased dietary intake can extend well beyond the first week (35).
Implications for Inadequate Energy Intake

The obvious and immediate reason for concern about reduced dietary intake is the risk
of body mass loss, and more specifically, loss of lean mass and bone tissue. Body mass
losses of 1% to 5% of preflight body mass have been a typical finding in the history

of space flight, although some crewmembers have been able to maintain body mass

(6, 31, 50). ln-flight anol postflight losses of body mass are compiled in Figure 14 and
Figure 15. Documented weight losses have occurred on short- and long-duration flights
in both the US and Russian space programs (23, 51-53). Indeed, all crewmembers

on Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, anol Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions lost body mass

"
"18","(54); thus, ingestion of E 4
the prescribed energy In
intake on the US Skylab E 2
missionsdidnotensure IE ﬂ ______________ _
maintenance of body E
mass (28). In one study E E .1
of 13 male Shuttle E"";
crewmembers, body .3 m ‘4
mass losses ranged from E -E I
0 to 3.9 kg (11). Body U
mass loss has been E _3
observed to reach 10%
to 15% of preflight body Q‘E r599 3...? ~99] d? it? ﬁt} .439 :35:
mass (55) Crewmembers ﬁg ‘55 {P h “I?"" ‘1“ Q—
' 1: 1‘ «99 :1“ a“
on ISS have shown *7: *5:
similar patterns of mass
loss during and after flight. Figure 14. In-f/ight body mass measurement data from
55 ISS crewmembers, Pre = preflight, FDX = flight day X,
R+X = x days after landing. Data are expressed as percent
change from preflight values and are mean i SD. Figure
and data adapted from Zwart et a/ (7).
1
E I I El
I u
E .. .E:n”“'!'
E h: I = I III I I BE [D I J“
I n I I
E l I I I I U I u E in?-
ﬂ I I n I El ‘
‘5' -1 - F
I I
-1
:1 El] 4-H El] HI 1th] 12:! 141] 15:1 11!!! 2M! ﬂu
Mission duration {clays}
Figure 15. Changes in body weight on the day of landing relative to before flight. Data are
expressed as percent change from preflight values. Each symbol represents 1 crewmember from
a mission on the Space Shuttle (green, N=25), Skylab (red, N=9), Mir (blue, N=19), ISS Expeditions
1-18 (dark purple, N=26), or Expeditions 19-36 (light purple, N=31). Duration data have been
adjusted slightly to ensure anonymity. Data updated from initial publications (2, 56).
Data from Apollo missions Clearly document the relationship between energy intake
and weight loss (Figure 16). Data relating reduced dietary intake during semi-starvation
to loss of body mass were collected in 2 ground-based studies, not related to space
flight. In the first study (57), subjects who consumed 580 koaI/d lost 7% of their body
mass in 12 days and subjects who consumed 1010 koaI/d lost 11% of their body mass
in 24 days. In the other study, starved subjects lost 9% of their body mass after 11 days,
15% by day 18, and 18% by day 43 (58).

"
"19","Only about 1% of the loss of
E 1'“ body mass can be explained
E. 3"" :93??? :3 3:11? by loss of body water (19);
E [.3 ' ' p ' most of the observed loss
ﬂ . ' of body mass is accounted
E {1,5 '. ' i for by loss of muscle and
'3"" ' I fat tissue (1 O, 59). The water
.3 (1.4 I, W i I I, loss may be confounded by
.E ' i . lean tissue loss, as metabolic
$ {1.2 ' i I . water loss will be associated
5 u ' with depletion of glycogen
f: [”3 stores and protein catabolism,
1” 15 2D 25 30 35 4“ both of which occur with
Energy intake inadequate intake. Inadequate
{kcallkglday} energy intake is associated
not only with loss of fat tissue,
Figure 16. Relationship between energy intake (kcaI/kg but also with decreased
body mass/d) and weight loss (Change in body mass/ol, protein synthesis (60) (during
kg) dufing Apollo missions. N = 33. Data are courtesy space flight), increased protein
Of W’ll’am carpent’er' catabolism (61) (during bed
rest), and subsequent loss
of lean tissue mass.
Besides the obvious concerns about body mass loss and dehydration (62), existing
data suggest that many systems are affected by inadequate nutrient intake, including
the muscle, bone, cardiovascular, and immune systems. The German Institute of
Aerospace Medicine at the German Aerospace Center conducted a study jointly with
the European Space Agency (ESA) to evaluate the impact of hypooalorio nutrition on
multiple systems. A crossover design was used, with hypooalorio and eucalorio phases,
and bed rest and ambulatory phases. Data from this study document the fact that
undernutrition exacerbates the negative effects of bed rest on human physiology (61).
Undernutrition has also been found to impair cardiovascular performance (orthostatio
tolerance) in controlled bed rest settings (63) and after space flight (William Carpentier,
personal communication; see additional information in section 6, “Cardiovascular
Health”). The mechanism for this energy-Cardiovasoular connection has been
hypothesized to involve multiple functions of many endocrine factors, including insulin,
leptin, and growth hormone (64).
Anecdotal reports from crewmembers on long-duration missions indicate that
crewmembers who had lost a significant amount of body mass on orbit had an excess
amount of rebound weight gain after landing, but in general, the data do not support
this finding (2).
It is imperative that adequate resources be provided to support food consumption on
exploration missions. A reliable food system must include a variety of palatable foods and
the means (such as rehydration, heating, and cooling) to process them for consumption.
Time (for meal preparation, consumption, and Cleanup) is another limited resource that
often hinders dietary intake during space flight. The use of freezers and refrigerators for
food storage and preparation would provide a more palatable food system, which would
increase dietary intake as well as provide added psychological support.
Deficiency of dietary energy intake leads to wasting and ultimately tissue breakdown,
or even death. The loss of lean body mass during space flight is significant, and is

"
"20","associated with increased proteolysis and catabolism related to metabolic stress (65).
Inadequate energy intake can also have negative effects on bone, exacerbated by
exercise (66, 67). This highlights the interaction between systems, and the fact that
exercise regimens must be coordinated with energy provision.

It is difficult to predict the impact of suboptimal (or lack of) energy intake on otherwise
healthy individuals. One issue is that the energy equivalent of the lost mass changes
with time, as different body fuels are used at different times during semi-starvation

(57, 68). With partial rations available (1000 cal/d), it is reasonable to expect that a
person could survive for more than 4 to 6 months, potentially longer if the metabolic
rate were to decrease because of decreased intake. If energy availability were restricted
further, survivability would range between this amount of time and the 1 to 2 months
possible with no food. These projections obviously include many assumptions,
unknowns, and extrapolations. Data from 10 Irish Republican Army hunger strikers,
who consumed water ad libitum but no energy, vitamins, or minerals, indicate that an
average 25-year-old male could survive no longer than 60 days without energy (69, 70).
Other possible effects of long-term low intake of calories include decreased motor and
cognitive function, each of which could impair an astronaut’s ability to perform work-
related tasks necessary for landing. According to military survival studies, astronauts
would be expected to experience decreased endurance early on, and the decrease

in strength would parallel the decrease in lean body mass (71). During total fasting,
degradation of coordination, speed, and cognitive function would be evident within

the first 2 weeks (71).

The metabolic condition of ketosis, which would be expected to result from starvation,
not only would have metabolic effects (including decreased appetite), but might also
affect other aspects of the mission (for example, the life-support systems might not

be able to remove the ketones from the air). Ketoacidosis can obviously have negative
effects on acid-base balance, which in turn can affect bone, muscle, and other systems.
It is speculated that a crew could survive on a spacecraft or planetary base for

40 to 60 days without food. With limited rations (1000 cal/d), a crew could survive

4 to 6 months (although physical performance capability might be severely degraded).
The high-stress environment of a contingency during transit or on a planetary surface
would likely exacerbate the basic effects of limited rations, and would shorten
projections of survivability estimated from ground-based studies.

Insufficient dietary intake and subsequent loss of body mass are significant not only
for crew health but also for medical operations and research studies, in which clear
interpretation of essentially all other physiological data is impossible when subjects are
malnourished. That is to say that virtually all space flight data collected on Shuttle, Mir,
and many ISS missions are confounded by inadequate dietary intake. Investigators who
have studied bone and muscle, cardiovascular function, immune response, and other
systems during space flight cannot say to what degree undernutrition affected their
findings.

While research may be warranted to better understand why astronauts typically

do not consume 100% of their recommended intakes, recent data from ISS
crewmembers clearly document that intakes can be met during space flight (31).

In addition to maintaining energy intake and vitamin D status, in conjunction with
exercise, these crewmembers maintained body mass; came home leaner, with less

fat; and maintained bone mineral density at preflight levels (31). Additional details

are provided in section 4, “Bone.”

"
"21","Studies of energy expenditure have been conducted only on short-duration (Shuttle)
flights (11, 12). Whether the same trends continue on longer flights is not known

(an ESA-sponsored study of energy expenditure on ISS missions is currently in
development). The health implications of decreased energy expenditure need to

be determined, and ways to prevent both in-flight loss and postflight gain of body
mass need to be evaluated.

At least 2 approaches exist to controlling body mass and composition while studying
human adaptation to bed rest: maintaining body mass (as is typically done in the US)
or allowing subjects to lose total mass while keeping fat mass constant (and thus losing
lean tissue). While this latter approach sounds intriguing, implementing it has proven
very difficult, given the difficulties in measuring fat mass and adapting intake in a timely
manner. Nonetheless, Biolo and colleagues have recently reported data suggesting that
the more the fat mass increases during bed rest, the more lean tissue is lost, and that
this loss is confounded by increases in oxidative and inflammatory damage markers (72).
Altered fuel homeostasis has been documented in other bed rest studies (73) and animal
studies (74, 75), but remains to be fully elucidated, in bed rest or space flight (75, 76).
Carbohydrate

Carbohydrates play an important role in the body because they supply the primary
source of energy as well as a readily available source. This energy is oxidized and used
by various organs and cells in the body, particularly the brain and red blood cells, which
depend solely on carbohydrate for energy. The human body stores about 150 to 500 g
of carbohydrate as glycogen, in the liver and skeletal muscle (77). Most of the body’s
glycogen is in skeletal muscle. Muscle glycogen stores are used mainly by muscle,
whereas the smaller glycogen stores in the liver are used to maintain, store, and export
blood glucose. Glycogen stores, especially those in the liver, fluctuate greatly during the
day in response to food intake, and these fluctuations may be involved in the regulation
of food intake (78). Liver stores of glycogen are depleted after 12 to 18 hours of fasting
(77). In skeletal muscle, glycogen synthesis is triggered by a rise in insulin after the
consumption of carbohydrates. De novo synthesis of glucose from non-Carbohydrate
precursors can and does occur in the body, if needed. This allows the liver to maintain
adequate blood glucose concentrations. Insulin is required for the uptake of glucose
into cells, and various transporter systems are found in different types of tissues that
utilize glucose.

Requirements for carbohydrate in space are thought to be similar to those on Earth.
However, to date, few investigations have been conducted on the effects of microgravity
on the metabolism of dietary carbohydrate, and those studies have had conflicting
results.

On the Shuttle, studies by German investigators showed no impact of 7 days of flight
on glucose tolerance tests (79). A Russian study documented a reduction in fasting
plasma glucose after 60 or 88 days of flight on a Salyut-Soyuz spacecraft complex,

and a reduced peak of blood glucose in glucose tolerance tests (80, 81). Insulin
resistance (lack of sensitivity to insulin) has been found to result from simulated
weightlessness (bed rest) (73, 82-84). Using C-peptide excretion as a proxy, Stein

et al found evidence of insulin resistance during actual and simulated space flight (85).
Heer et aI. documented that after 3 weeks of bed rest, glucose tolerance was altered
for more than 4 days after reambulation (378). Efforts to maintain muscle mass

(and presumably correct the insulin resistance) continue, but little research has

been done to pursue this as a nutritional issue.

"
"22","Suboptimal carbohydrate intake before and during space flight may have consequences
for the crew’s productivity and impede their ability to respond in emergency situations
(86). Deficiency of carbohydrate leads to ketosis. A ketotic state would likely impair
performance of orewmembers, as seen in studies conducted by the military (71), as

well as increase renal stone risk secondary to reduced urinary pH (87-89). Other aspects
of the mission would also be at risk (for example, the life-support systems may not be
able to remove exhaled ketones from the air). Toxicity of carbohydrate has not been
well studied, and would likely be an issue only because it would displace other nutrients
(protein and fat) from the diet.

Few data are currently available to assess the impact of space flight on carbohydrate
metabolism. Observations from space flight as well as ground-based bed rest studies
show subtle changes in insulin secretion, insulin resistance, and glucose intolerance
(83, 84, 90, 91). Even subtle Changes in such important metabolic processes make

it critically important to consider the likelihood, nature, and consequences of altered
carbohydrate and insulin metabolism for exploration missions.

Fat (and Fatty Acids)

Fat is the most energy-dense of all the nutrients, and therefore is a major energy

source for the body. Chemically, dietary fat is mainly in the form of triaoylglyoerols,
which contain a glycerol backbone with as many as 3 fatty acids attached. Many types
of fatty acids exist, including saturated, monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, and trans.
Dietary fat assists in the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and supplies the body with
the 2 essential fatty acids, linoleio acid and linolenio acid. These essential fatty acids
are necessary for growth and development as well as many other biochemical
processes, including production of eicosanoids (physiologically active substances
derived from arachidonio acid). Lipids, in the form of phospholipids, make up a large
proportion of the structural components of the cellular membrane bilayer. Energy stored
as fat is released in the process of fatty acid oxidation, and fat supplies more energy
than any other macronutrient because of its higher content of oarbon-to-hydrogen
bonds. According to case studies, people following fat-free diets can exhibit symptoms
of essential fatty acid deficiencies after only 1 month (92, 93).

While few, if any, studies have been conducted to look at dietary fat, plasma lipid

levels, and related factors in space flight, voluminous data exist from routine medical
examinations conducted before and after flight, along with annual medical exams,

as reviewed previously (2). Contrary to the typical lipoprotein response to weight

loss, low-density lipoprotein concentrations tended to increase in long-duration
orewmembers who lost weight during the flight. This relationship seemed to return

to normal by the subsequent medical exam (2).

Alterations in fuel homeostasis and regulatory hormones have been noted in space
flight and ground-based studies. Bed rest studies have documented alterations in fuel
homeostasis (94), including gender differences (73). Specifically, lipogenesis increased
during bed rest, to a greater extent in women than in men. Additionally, men had
increased carbohydrate oxidation (73). Other studies have shown inflammatory changes
during bed rest, along with insulin resistance, leading to increased body fat and altered
fatty aCid metabolism (95). Given these data, and the insulin, leptin, and other endocrine
Changes noted in bed rest and space flight (15, 96, 97), Changes in fuel homeostasis in
bed rest olearly warrant additional investigation.

"
"23","The role of omega-3 fatty acids in cancer prevention has been investigated in animal
models of space flight radiation effects (98, 99). Not only do omega—3 fatty acids
(in combination with pectin) show promise in alleviating cancer risk (98-102), but these
fatty acids also have weII-dooumented cardiovascular benefits. Abundant data show
that eicosapentaenoio acid can successfully prevent muscle atrophy in other muscle-
wasting Circumstances, such as cancer or sepsis (103-112), indicating the likelihood
is high that eicosapentaenoio acid will have the same beneficial effects on muscle
atrophy during space flight or in ground-based analogs including bed rest.
Omega—3 fatty acids also have been shown to protect bone, in the general population
(113-115) as well as in space flight analog studies, including bed rest and cell culture
(116). Although omega-3 fatty acids have not been studied in a controlled fashion during
actual space flight, a positive correlation was found between fish intake and bone loss
in astronauts (1 16). That
is, those who ate more fish
lost less bone (Figure 17). A 5
These data provide additional 5
evidence of the potential 0 g
importance of fish oils as a E e I
countermeasure for muscle, a; °- ° ‘ ‘ ' 'I‘ ‘I‘ ' ' + I ’ ‘ ' ‘ ' ‘ °
bone, and radiation risks of '8 E ' I I I
space flight. Studies showing 3 ‘5 I I
positive effects of omega—3 3 g3 -5 '
fatty acids typically look at E g l
intake of fish or other food 0
sources of these nutrients $40 I
(117-119). Studies Of fiSh Oil 0 1 2 3 4 5
supplements added to typical Mean ﬁsh servings (#lwk)
diets often fail to document
ﬁny beneﬁt (120-122)’ thus Figure 17. Relationship between fish intake during long-
Ighllghtlng the need for d . . _ . .
. . . . uratlon flight and whole body bone mineral densn‘y loss
dietary modlflcatlon, _and not after flight on [88. Figure adapted from (116).
Simply supplementation.
Cofactors in Energy Metabolism
Many mioronutrients—vitamins anol minerals—are involved in energy homeostasis,
including thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, iodine, manganese, and even
chromium. We previously reviewed sources, functions, deficiency symptoms, and
concerns for space flight for these nutrients (2). In general, few data are available
on these nutrients with respect to effects of space flight, or on availability and stability
of these nutrients in the space food system. No specific concerns have been raised at
this point, but ensuring adequacy of intake of these nutrients and understanding their
metabolism, human requirements for them under space flight conditions, and their
stability in the food system will be critical on exploration missions. Additionally, their
nutritional status should continue to be monitored as we begin to embark on longer
missions, including the initial 1-year mission on the International Space Station
planned for 2015.

"
"24","Astronaut Sunita L. Williams, Expedition 14 flight engineer,
uses chopsticks to eat a meal near the galley in the Zvezda
Service Module of the International Space Station.
1'
‘l.
ill I- -
i. - .
i. ‘t-u '
. 1-. - .
_ Er} Ea '-
‘ H -. I a “El-
{fgiﬂ _ .. _
l I III- I .
J I 1-H” ""r ' i

"
"25","i Muscle and Protein
As the major structural component of all cells in the body, protein includes molecules
that perform many essential physiological functions, serving as enzymes, hormones,
transporters, and other important molecules. The total energy contribution of protein
to the average diet is about 15%. The nitrogen in its amino-acid building blocks makes
protein, along with nucleic acids, one of the major nitrogen-oontaining macromolecules.
Protein is one of the most important limiting factors when the body is deprived of
energy, because essential amino acids are not stored in the body. A complete depletion
of energy and protein reserves is said to be the cause of death from starvation. It is
estimated that when 33% to 50% of total body protein is lost, death results (123).
Loss of more than 40% to 50% of initial body mass is not compatible with life (71, 124).
In one case report, individuals on a hunger strike lost 30% of their total body mass and
19% of total body protein before they died (69, 70).
Protein Intake
Maintaining a proper protein intake is vital, as both Iow-protein and high-protein
diets can cause harm (and, at the extreme, death). A Iow-protein diet (below the
recommended dietary allowance) for up to 4 weeks can decrease calcium absorption
and cause increased secretion of parathyroid hormone in otherwise healthy subjects
(125, 126). The impact of chronically low protein intake is not well understood;
however, several studies suggest that Iow-protein diets are associated with loss
of bone density (127, 128).
Actual intakes of protein 1: .
during space flight El; .
typically exceed these E 1:5 ﬂ. . 1'
reoommendations(2), Em H ____-___-I.-__-___--.
as shown in the table 3 m 15 l
,, . ,, . I: J: 1.5
Nutrient Intake Data In “E ‘E 1.4 I H .‘p
the Appendices (page 134). E E 133 _ _ _%:_ _ _ _
European studies have E E 1.1 I. .
shown that on long missions, n. ‘7'- 3,;3 '
reaching (or exceeding) 5 H; ' ' ' ' ' ' "" Irr "" ' ' ' ' ' ' '
nominal protein intakes is n25 H
common, but that on short ""‘5
flights (Shuttle missions) Figure 18. Protein intake during space flight on [88
protein intake is less than missions (N=56). Each point represents an individual
the recommended amount crewmember, and is their reported average intake over the
because Of insufficient course of the mission. Dashed lines represent space flight
food intake (21)_ On ISS (ancil gro:ngl—%ased) proteZttIl'htake requ£remlentslof 1.8 g
. . ro em 0 mass, an e ran e 0 re an In a es
mISSIons, on average, I(31.2.-1. 73kg) recommended by tth Amirican Dietetic
proteln Intake IS rhore Association, Dietitians of Canada, and American College
than adequate (Flgure 18)' of Sports Medicine for high-intensity athletes (130).

"
"26","Some data suggest that during the recovery period after short-duration Shuttle

flights, protein was a limiting nutrient, and that competition for substrate to replenish
plasma proteins and muscle mass strains the system (129). This has not been

tested experimentally, but it is clear that good nutrition is required for rapid return

to optimal health.

Vitamin BB

Vitamin 86 comprises a group of 3 compounds and their 5-phosphates (P): pyridoxal
(PL) and PLP, pyridoxine (PN) anoI PNP, anoI pyridoxamine (PM) and PMP (131). We
previously reviewed vitamin 86 basics (2). Weightlessness has been shown to reduce
the cross-sectional area of muscle fibers and is associated with a change from type |
to type II muscle fibers (132). As vitamin 86 is stored mainly in muscle tissue (133),

a decrease in muscle cross-sectional area could reduce the amount of the vitamin

that is stored. Increased excretion of 4-pyridoxic acid (4-PA) during bed rest, a finding
observed in short- (134) and long-duration bed rest studies (135), likely reflects this
loss of muscle stores of vitamin Ba.

Given the changes observed in vitamin 86 metabolism during bed rest, vitamin 86
status during and after long-duration space flight warrants further attention. A deficiency
in vitamin 86 causes a decrease in the synthesis of serotonin and catecholamines, which
has been shown to be associated with depression (136). Excess vitamin 86 can lead to
neuropathy (137-139).

There is no evidence that vitamin 86 status changes during long-duration space flight;
however, we have shown that crewmembers who have experienced vision-reIated
issues have higher blood concentrations of cystathionine and 2-methylcitric acid than
crewmembers who did not experience such issues (140). Although increased levels

of these metabolites do not point to a vitamin 86 deficiency, they do suggest there may
be a perturbation in the 1-carbon metabolism pathway, which is dependent on folate,
vitamin B12, and vitamin BS.

Muscle Loss and Protein Turnover in Microgravity

Exposure to microgravity reduces muscle mass, volume, and performance, especially
in the legs, on both short (28, 141-146) and long flights (28, 141, 147-151).

As with most physiological systems, a variety of techniques are used to quantify
changes in different aspects of muscle. These include functional muscle performance/
exercise tests, muscle biopsies to evaluate cellular changes, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of muscle tissue, and tracer kinetic studies to evaluate changes in protein
metabolism. Each technique provides a different perspective and unique information.
The picture becomes more complex when results from models and analogs (including
nonhuman ones) are compared with those from space flight. As a result, the topic

of space flight effects on muscle is very complex, and defining and understanding

the big picture is difficult, to say the least. This topic has been reviewed (142, 152-156),
and the difficulties of interpreting findings across the literature have also been noted
(146,152,155)

Basic clinical testing includes determinations of circulating proteins. Blood
concentrations of total protein and albumin were elevated at landing after Skylab
missions. Urinary albumin has been shown to be reduced during space flight and

bed rest (157-159). Measurements of urinary albumin excretion, which is typically

"
"27","low in healthy individuals, have not been reported after landing. Potassium and nitrogen
balances became increasingly negative throughout the Skylab flights, but urinary
creatinine (a measure of muscle mass) did not Change (29, 160) despite losses of leg
volume (28, 161). Nitrogen balance has also been shown to be negative during Shuttle
flights (162).

Evaluation of plasma and urinary amino acid levels often does not provide a Clear picture
of muscle or even protein metabolism, but in some cases, these are among the limited
available data. An increase in plasma amino acids was noted in cosmonauts after short
(2-d) anol long-duration (63-d) flights (163, 164). Limited Shuttle flight data indicate a
tendency for plasma branched-Chain amino acids to be increased during flight, relative
to preflight levels (165). Data from short-duration Shuttle flights have revealed little

or no change in urinary amino acid profiles (26), but data from the Apollo and Skylab
missions showed increases in urinary excretion of the amino acid metabolites creatinine,
sarcosine, anol 3-methylhistidine (166), suggesting that contractile proteins of skeletal
muscle are degraded in weightlessness.

The amount of protein in the body or individual tissues is affected by the balance

of protein synthesis and protein catabolism. Studies to understand Changes in body
protein, ideally, will include measurement of both of these factors in addition to turnover.
Measuring these factors is not easy, and the results are variable (151, 167), but having
the complete picture is critical. For example, although both decreased protein synthesis
and increased protein catabolism will yield a net loss of muscle, the mechanisms and
countermeasures for the 2 processes are quite different.

Turnover studies with stable isotopes indicate that during short-term space flight,
whole-body protein turnover and protein synthesis increase, and a greater percentage
increase occurs in protein breakdown (162, 168). The increase in synthesis is
hypothesized by Stein et al (156, 169) to be related to physiological stress, as indicated
by generally (but not consistently) increased urinary cortisol during flight (15, 19, 97).
These findings are similar to those in catabolic patients undergoing metabolic
breakdown. Decreased prostaglandin secretion has also been implicated in the loss

of muscle tissue during space flight, secondary to decreased mechanical stress on
muscle (97). On long-duration Mir flights, conversely, investigators noted decreased
rates of protein synthesis (12), secondary to reduced dietary energy intake (60).

Ground Analog Studies

In humans, bed rest is the most common model used for studying Changes in muscle
and protein during disuse. Some studies have also used unilateral limb suspension
(ULLS) as a model for these Changes, allowing subjects more freedom, while significantly
reducing the costs of such studies. Other human models have also been tested,
including “dry immersion,” as reviewed by Navasiolava et al (170). All of these models
provide a means to collect data that would be difficult if not impossible to collect during
actual space flight, on a larger group of subjects. However, it is important to remember
that the model system may not, and likely does not, provide an exact replica of the
physiological Changes during space flight. Untreated bed rest and ULLS both result

in loss of muscle mass and strength, as nioely reviewed by Narici and de Boer (152).

As mentioned earlier, muscle loss in space may be related to Changes in turnover

of protein in the whole body. Many studies document a decrease in protein synthesis
during bed rest (171-178). Evidence of increased protein catabolism during bed rest

is limited, as reviewed by Bodine (155). There are 2 key confounding, anol intertwined,
issues (among others) with this area of research: energy intake and inflammation.

"
"28","Energy consumption during space flight is generally not controlled; that is, astronauts
are allowed to consume as much, or as little, as they desire. Historically, this lack of
control has resulted in underconsumption, as described in section 2, “Energy and Fuel
Metabolism.” The prospect of comparing the controllable ground-analog model with
actual space flight, in which underconsumption can occur, presents a study design
issue. Investigators typically either seek to maintain energy intake and body mass of
the subjects during bed rest, or restrict calories to recreate the hypocaloric intakes

of space flight. Other studies a||ow subjects to regulate energy intake voluntarily.

It should be noted that, because energy expenditure decreases (about 15%) during
bed rest secondary to decreased activity (14, 179), essentially all studies reduce energy
intake during bed rest to some degree. Furthermore, because protein is an energy-
containing nutrient, it is impossible to alter caloric intake without altering either protein
intake or the relative contribution of protein to overall energy intake. This becomes
critical in nutritional countermeasure studies, in which provision of additional protein
and/or amino acids is often a focus.

Restricting energy consumption to match earlier findings from space flight concedes
the point that astronauts may be able to maintain dietary energy intake during flight.
This was observed during Skylab anol EuroMir missions, albeit in a controlled fashion
(ie, these crewmembers were participating in metabolic studies and were required to
consume the planned menu) (180, 181). More recently on ISS, crewmembers have been
able to maintain energy intake at >90% of predicted requirements. Coupling this energy
intake with heavy resistance and other forms of exercise, crewmembers maintained
body mass, returned with an increased percentage of lean body mass, and maintained
bone mineral density (31). This study is described in more detail later in this book, but
it is mentioned here because it documents that crewmembers can consume adequate
energy intake without their diet being strictly controlled.

Inadequate caloric intake results in 2 significant effects on protein and muscle. |nitia||y,
breakdown of glycogen in muscle will reduce muscle volume, in large part because of
the water content associated with stored glycogen. Second, the body will catabolize
protein for energy. Thus, studies of hypocaloric subjects wi|| inherently be confounded
by this situation. As detailed below, provision of supplemental protein or amino acids is
an oft-tested countermeasure for muscle loss, but it is plausible that provision of energy
in any form will help maintain lean (and other) tissues in this metabolic environment.
Muscle loss has been observed in bed rest and other analog studies, even when energy
intake and body mass are maintained. It has been argued that in individuals who lose
muscle under those conditions, maintenance of body mass during bed rest leads to

a chronic, |ow-|eve| inflammatory response, which can subsequently lead to increased
fat mass along with muscle loss (72, 182, 183). This argument has led to attempts to
reduce caloric intake to the point where fat mass is not changing (although body mass
decreases, related to loss of muscle tissue). This is a difficult prospect at best, given
that body composition is measured (typically by duaI-energy x-ray absorptiometry)
infrequently (eg, every 2 wk), and thus any corrections lag behind, or may overshoot,
before the next determination.

The ideal answer for how to control body (or fat) mass during bed rest remains under
debate. Nonetheless, as with any scientific study, it is critical to know the limitations
and implications of every study design and, if possible, to relate studies with these
limitations to other studies in the literature. One necessity for making the findings

of such studies useful to readers of scientific papers is body mass data, which we
suggest should be reported in every published bed rest study.

"
"29","Beyond the controllable factors, other issues exist that can affect bed rest study results.
Variability in stress levels can be a key factor for many physiological systems, but
particularly muscle. An increase in stress level, as indicated by increased concentrations
of cortisol in blood plasma and urine, is typically associated with the initial days of
space flight. In many cases, urinary cortisol excretion returns to preflight levels after

5 to 9 days, although this phenomenon has yet to be fully Characterized or generalized
to all crews. Ground-based studies have the potential for stress to increase, but this

is not an entirely consistent finding. Some studies have shown no Change, or even

a downward trend, in cortisol excretion during bed rest (184). As seen with studies

of energy metabolism, administration of exogenous cortisol or thyroid hormone induces
metabolic stress, which may produce a more accurate ground-based model of protein
metabolism during space flight (16, 185-187). Ground-based rodent studies generally
show increased proteolysis along with reduced protein synthesis (151), a pattern similar
to that seen in studies of humans during flight, described above.

Muscle Loss Countermeasures

Mechanical

Exercise is the most common first-pass approach to maintaining muscle mass and
strength (142, 154, 188-190). The exercise regimens tested as countermeasures to
date have generally not succeeded in maintaining muscle mass or strength (or bone
mass) during space flight (190). On Mir flights, crewmembers differed significantly with
respect to in-flight exercise frequency and intensity (related to such factors as mission
requirements and personal habits). However, losses of leg muscle volume, detected
immediately after flight by magnetic resonance imaging, were almost 20% in all subjects
(191). Similar findings (wide variations in exercise, lack of difference in bone loss) have
also been documented for bone loss (55).

Many types of exercise protocols have been proposed to aid in the maintenance of
both muscle and bone during flight (175, 192-203), but these have yet to be fully tested
on orbit. Given that ISS crews use multiple exercise devices, studies ideally will look

at exercise protocols that use more than 1 device. Combined resistance and aerobic
exercise protocols have shown promise for protecting muscle (and the cardiovascular
system) in bed rest (204, 205); space flight testing is underway.

WhoIe-body vibration alone or superimposed on resistive exercise is a rather new
concept and has received much attention recently in the hope that it can provide

a viable musculoskeletal countermeasure, particularly when strenuous exercise might
increase the risk for injury, for instance in older people (206-213). However, the efficacy,
vibration dose, frequency, and duration of who|e-body vibration exercise need further
research. As mentioned earlier, mechanical stimulation is a prerequisite to avoid muscle
and bone degradation. According to the mechanostat theory by Frost (214, 215), to
keep up muscle and bone mass and strength, a certain individual level of mechanical
stimulation has to be achieved. Lowering or increasing that level leads to respective
degradation or increase. For who|e-body vibration training, the vibration magnitude
seems to be one of the key factors. Vibration magnitude is vibration frequency (Hz)
times the amplitude or displacement (mm) (211). This is most likely the reason why
mere who|e-body vibration training to the musculoskeletal system with a frequency

of 20 Hz has not always been demonstrated to be effective for muscle and bone (216).
Superimposing who|e-body vibration training on resistive exercise seemed to be more
effective. This was done in 2 bed rest studies with durations of 56 and 60 days and

"
"30","young, healthy male subjects (210, 213). When whole-body vibration training was added
to resistive exercise, it was able to attenuate muscle and bone atrophy and lumbar spine
deconditioning, and to prevent fat accumulation in vertebral marrow (210, 217-220).
Pharmacological
Testosterone has also been suggested as a muscle (and/or bone) loss countermeasure,
on the basis of data from animal models (221, 222) and data documenting a reduction
in testosterone concentrations during flight in humans, animals, and cellular models of
space flight (223-230). A potential confounding factor is the drop in testosterone that
has been observed in exercising bed rest subjects (but not controls) (231).
The first in-flight testosterone data from human space flight were from 4 astronauts on
Space Shuttle mission STS-55, which flew in 1993, and from 3 astronauts on Skylab 4,
an 84-day mission (232). On the Shuttle mission, after 4 or 5 days of flight, Circulating
testosterone levels were decreased relative to preflight levels, when measured in serum,
saliva, and urine. Serum cortisol, cortisol biorhythms, anol dehydroepiandrosterone-
sulfate concentrations in these 4 astronauts were unchanged during flight (228, 233).
A significant confounding issue is that these crewmembers were consuming only about
60-85% of their basal metabolic energy requirements during the flight (21). Estimates
of space flight energy requirements typically use an activity factor of 1.7 (that is,
1.7 x basal metabolic rate) (2). This factor is based on data documenting that total
energy requirements are unchanged during flight (11), or in some cases are even
increased with heavy exercise (12), relative to before flight. Even if lower estimates of
activity were used, the result would reveal significant energy deficit in crewmembers
on the STS-55 mission, especially during the days of sample collections (21). Indeed,
energy intake, which was very carefully documented on these missions, was below even
basal requirements. Energy deficits, both short-term and long-term, are associated with
lower circulating testosterone (free and total) (234-236). Thus, the discrepancy between
the long-duration data presented here (Figure 19) and the earlier reports of effects
observed during the first week of flight could be explained simply by inadequate
energy intake.
Recent data show
that testosterone 5“
and related hormones u:
are unchanged by E 40
real or simulated ﬂ ..—..

. m .1“ 31]
weightlessness, apart a T:
from transient effects E E
on landing day (237). : 5.2”
The Skylab data include 5.5 1n
urinary testosterone '—
from 3 crewmembers; D
at 2 in-flight data points, gm 3:3 ,3 .3: ﬁt: ﬁn q? ﬁt: “a ﬁt:
excretion was increased J“ ‘v ‘J ((9 (<9 ((9 Q0“ «Oh ‘3‘ 423‘
relative to the preflight
period (232, 237)- Figure 19. Total serum testosterone concentrations (mean i SD)
Plasma data from before (L-X), during (PBX), and after flight on [88. Although
the 3 Skylab missions Circulating concentrations decreased significantly after flight
(N29) are reported to (at F?+0), no other time point differed significantly from the
have shown preflight mean. N215. Data are from Smith et a/ (23 7).

"
"31","“a trend toward lower values after the mission” (232). Although we do not have urinary
testosterone data on all crewmembers, these reports from the 1970s confirm the
findings from ISS (237).
Bed rest analog data from a number of studies demonstrate that bed rest has no effect
on circulating testosterone concentrations (174, 231, 237-239). Consistent decreases
in serum testosterone were observed after subjects had been in the bed rest facility
for 7 days (while they were still ambulatory) and then another decrease occurred when
testosterone was measured 5 days after re-ambulation. The pre-bed rest change is likely
related to stress and decreased ambulation whi|e subjects were in the bed rest facility,
and the post-bed rest Change was probably related to body fluid shifts during and after
bed rest. No Changes in testosterone occurred during bed rest (237).
Bed rest studies have generally shown no effect of bed rest on circulating total or
free testosterone (174, 231, 237-239) in sedentary subjects. Bed rest subjects, in most
models, are required to consume energy at a level to maintain body mass. If energy
deficits are indeed part of the observed decrease in testosterone during the Shuttle
flights previously reported, this may also explain the difference between those flight
data and bed rest study data, reported herein and elsewhere. Although we showed an
intermittent decrease in total and free testosterone in bed rest subjects with or without
an artificial gravity
(ie, centrifugation)
protocol (134), this 5 700
study had combined 2""
the 2 pre-bed rest 05 650
collection sessions. :
When these sessions 9 600 - _ - \
were analyzed separately *3 550 \‘s‘ ,I’ ‘
because of our results 3 ’ ‘ ~ -
in the later bed rest 8 500 ‘
study, it turned out """"
that testosterone § 450
concentrations were '5,
indeed higher only at U) 400
the first data collection 9 :x ‘b ‘9 Q ‘6
point (BR-10) than during 9Q- 9Q- QQ. Q? @Q! 0?}
or after bed rest (237) , ,
(Fi gu r e 20). Figurel20. Total serum testosterone concentrations (mean

i SD) In subjects before, during, and after bed rest With
One criticism Of (dashed line and open Circles) or without (solid line and filled
sedentary bed rest squares) an artificial gravity countermeasure. These data
studies as an analog have been published (134), although the pre-bed rest data
for space flight is that (BR-Q, BR- 1) were combined as an average in the original
astronauts are not manuscript. In this figure, the 2 ,ore-bed rest data points are
sedentary, especially graphed separately, as reported In (23 7).
on long-duration
missions, when they exercise extensively. Wade et al reported that
in a 4-week study, bed rest subjects with intensive exercise protocols had lower non-
fasting circulating plasma testosterone concentrations than non-exeroising bed rested
controls (231). They reported a small loss of (non-fasting) post-breakfast body mass
(231, 240), and reported that calorie and liquid intakes were designed to maintain
body mass. Despite the exercise, which was described as including an expenditure
of 214 or 446 koaI/d (5 times a week), actual intakes in the exercise groups were only
155 or 212 koaI/d greater than those of the no-exeroise group (240).

"
"32","In an earlier 30-day study, Zorbas et al showed that serum testosterone decreased
during bed rest only in trained subjects, whereas it did not Change in untrained subjects
during bed rest (241). Interestingly, when conditioned subjects were “hyperhydrated”
by saline ingestion during bed rest, testosterone did not Change relative to the pre-bed
rest period. In a shorter, 3-day bed rest, no differences in plasma testosterone were
observed before or after exercise, in typically untrained or trained individuals, either
cyclists or weight trainers (242). The astronauts in the study reported herein were
relatively fit before flight and exercised heavily during flight, using treadmill, cycle,

and resistive exercise devices. Clearly, the interrelationship of energy balance, exercise,
stress response, and endocrine function warrants further evaluation to better understand
the adaptive responses to space flight.

As reviewed by Tou (243), in studies of rats with sample collections after space

flight, serum (244) and urinary (245) testosterone were generally decreased relative

to the preflight period (246). Unfortunately, in-flight biological samples are typically

not available, given the difficulties with collection procedures in the microgravity
environment. These postflight conclusions are consistent with data reported on

landing day after a short-duration space flight (237). In ground-based rodent models,
short-duration (7-12 ol) unloading generally results in reduced Circulating testosterone
concentrations and an associated loss of bone and muscle mass (221, 222, 247).
Unloading of longer duration (6 wk) in rats resulted in impaired spermatogenesis, but
had no effect on Circulating testosterone concentrations (248). Similarly, the production
of testosterone by rat testes after actual space flight is diminished, as is response to
stimulation by luteinizing hormone (249). Contradicting these findings, another study
showed no Change in Circulating testosterone in suspended rats after suspension for

1 or 3 weeks, but an increase in testosterone of suspended animals after 8 weeks,
despite reduced testicular weight (250). One critical confounding factor in the hindlimb-
suspended rat model is that not all studies take (surgical) precautions to prevent
ascension of the testicles into the abdominal cavity, which can significantly affect
testosterone production, and interpretation of the study. Some, but not all, studies have
accounted for this, and this limitation contributes to inconsistencies in the literature.
Rotating cell culture vessels have also been used as an analog of weightlessness,

with some limitations, as with all analogs. Cultured testicular fragments exposed to

this environment, compared with static 1g cultures, have maintained cellular architecture
and have increased both proliferation and testosterone secretion (251), but with altered
testicular physiology (252), including impaired Leydig cell responsiveness to luteinizing
hormone stimulation. Whether the lack of change in circulating testosterone observed
in the studies reported herein obscured alterations in testicular physiology is unclear,
but it seems imprudent to make that leap without additional data.

Exogenous testosterone administration in humans during bed rest studies has
maintained muscle mass and protein balance, but with no effect on muscle strength
(239). Administration of testosterone to suspended rats mitigates muscle and bone
|osses (221). The bone data in rats are confounded by differential effects on growing
and adult rats (253), but these results are of interest nonetheless. Testosterone
administration to elderly individuals has shown that the bone response to testosterone
depended on the initial circulating testosterone concentrations (254). That is, subjects
who had normal blood concentrations of testosterone had less or no response to
testosterone administration. Given these data, there is little rationale for providing
testosterone during flight to mitigate bone loss.

"
"33","Hypergravity, induced by centrifugation, has been shown to result in increased urinary
testosterone excretion in monkeys (225), as well as in rats (245, 247). Hypergravity

has also been found to affect tissues of rats and some other endocrine variables, but
increased gravitational force had no effect on circulating testosterone (244). On the basis
of these data, authors have suggested that the response to gravity is roughly |inear, from
hypergravity (increased), to unit gravity, to microgravity (decreased) (225, 244). Intriguing
as this concept may be, the data presented herein do not support it.

As is understandable, the proposed use of exogenous steroids is somewhat
controversial. Muscle physiologists argue that despite the lack of Change in endogenous
steroids, exogenous androgens may prove a viable countermeasure nonetheless.
Treatments with such androgens have been reported to improve physical performance,
muscle mass, and muscle strength in both young athletes and older sedentary men
(255). The interaction of endocrine factors, aging (including middle age), the space
flight environment, and the use of exercise to replace loading is not well understood.

In summary, circulating testosterone and related hormones are unchanged by real or
simulated weightlessness, apart from transient effects after flight. Nonetheless, as we
contemplate space exploration beyond |ow Earth orbit, endocrine data will be critical
for understanding human adaptation in this unique environment, and potentially for
helping to counteract the negative effects of space flight on the human body.
Nutritional

Use of protein and amino acid supplementation has long been studied as a potential
means to mitigate muscle loss associated with space flight (82, 187, 204, 256-260), but
results have been inconclusive at best. Oral doses of branched-Chain amino acids had
little effect on Ieg-muscle protein kinetics in ambulatory male subjects (261), whereas
feeding a bed rest group adequate energy with excess protein reversed nitrogen losses
(176). However, feeding Skylab crewmen energy and protein equivalent to those given
to the bed rest group did not prevent negative nitrogen balance and loss of leg muscle
strength during flight (148, 160, 161). In another bed rest study, a leucine-enriohed,
high-protein diet failed to mitigate muscle loss, and in some sites exacerbated |oss
(258). It remains unclear whether nutritional measures beyond the consumption of
adequate energy and protein would be beneficial in reducing muscle atrophy.

In a 2011 review, Stein and Blanc evaluated the literature from bed rest studies (262),
and found that the effect (or lack thereof) of amino acids on muscle depended greatly
on protein intake and energy provision. Specifically, if nomina| protein intake (ie, in both
treatment and control groups) was at levels greater than 1.1 to 1.2 g protein/kg body
mass/d, then supplemental amino acids had no effect. If control subjects were provided
with 30.8 g protein/kg body mass/d while the supplemented group consumed >10 9
protein/kg body mass/d, then the supplement appeared to have an effect. If further
research is conducted in this area, the issue of study design, with particular reference
to protein and energy intake of all groups, needs to be carefully assessed. The bottom
line seems to be that if crewmembers consume enough protein and energy, then
supplemental amino acids (or other variants of protein supplementation) provide no
benefit (and as reviewed in the next subsection, “Protein and Bone,” they may actually
be detrimental). Thus, the primary countermeasure against muscle |oss remains
adequate energy intake, which will no doubt include protein, but protein supplements
are not required. In fact, protein can have negative implications for other systems,

bone in particular.

"
"34","Debate continues between nutritionists and exercise physiologists on the importance
and benefit of protein intake, amount and type of protein intake, and even timing of
protein intake on muscle. It is our contention that these studies are often too short

(if not simply a single bout of exercise) to allow an understanding of long-term effects
and adaptation, and are often not completely controlled with respect to treatment
groups. Protein (or amino acids) provides not only a nitrogen source, but moreover,

an energy source. Studies often compare protein consumption with fasting, without
evaluating whether a balanced meal would offer similar benefit. The summary above,
regarding the view of amino acid supplementation during bed rest, certainly gives reason
for concern about studies of protein and exercise, with or without bed rest. Thus, fully
balanced, long-term studies are required in order to conclusively define the effect of
protein intake and its timing on muscle. Unfortunately, these studies require multiple
treatment groups, which drives study costs to levels that are typically not available.

We will not review this field of literature here, but we refer interested readers to the
Muscle Space Flight Evidence Book.

Protein and Bone

The interrelationship of protein and bone health is complex, and often seemingly
contradictory. In certain populations (such as growing children), protein is essential

for bone growth. However, in some cases, high protein intakes can be detrimental

to bone (263), a fact confounded by the type of protein (and amino acids) consumed
and by their relation to other dietary factors (264, 265).

High-protein diets lead to hypercalciuria, and increase the risk of bone fracture and

the risk of renal stone formation (265, 266). In one 5-year study of 120 men, the relative
risk of stone formation on a restricted protein (52 g/d) and salt (50 mEq/d) diet was
found to be half that of men on a calcium-restricted diet (400 mg/d) (267). The reason
for the decreased risk of renal stones on a |ow-protein diet is not well understood, but
several potential mechanisms have been postulated. It is generally well accepted that
high-protein diets induce hypercalciuria, and this can contribute to formation of calcium
oxalate or calcium phosphate stones. One hypothesis to explain protein-induced
hypercalciuria is related to the “acid-ash” hypothesis that excessive intake of animal
protein provides excess sulfur—containing amino acids that are metabolized to sulfuric
acid (268, 269). Since bone is a large reservoir of base, it can be broken down to provide
carbonate or phosphate to neutralize fixed acid loads. Furthermore, low urinary pH
decreases urinary excretion of citrate, which is a potent inhibitor of stone formation.

In addition, dietary animal protein represents a rich source of purines that may raise
uric acid excretion, which could increase the risk of forming uric acid stones (270).
Protein-induced hypercalciuria may also be detrimental to bone (271). Some studies
show that high-protein diets increase intestinal absorption of calcium (272), but this has
not been widely accepted. The key to understanding the interrelationship of protein and
bone may lie in understanding the complexities of these types of studies, which may
require a full accounting of many nutrients and environmental factors (273, 274).
Several studies show that animal protein increases acid load more than does vegetable
protein because of the higher sulfur content per serving of food. Vegetable protein itself
does not necessarily have less sulfur per gram of protein, but a larger mass of foods
containing vegetable protein would have to be consumed to get the same amount of
protein as from foods containing animal protein. It can be assumed that foods containing
vegetable protein contain less sulfur than foods containing animal protein. In studies

"
"35","with controlled dietary intakes with varying sulfur content, diets consisting of animal
protein yielded greater urinary calcium excretion and lower urinary pH than similar diets
consisting mainly of vegetable protein (275). The results of another study comparing

the effects of 2 sources of protein (meat and soy protein), with and without additional
supplementation with sulfur amino acids, indicated that dietary meat elicited a greater
positive association between protein intake and urinary calcium, sulfur, ammonia, and
titratabIe acids than dietary soy elicited (276). When the soy diet was supplemented
with sulfur amino acids, urinary calcium and acid excretion increased. Conversely, the
addition of dietary potassium (as fruit or K+ supplement) to both diets decreased urinary
calcium and acid excretion (276). Other studies have shown that greater amounts of
protein or higher ratios of animal protein to potassium are more detrimental when bone
health is already compromised (such as during bed rest, and potentially during space
flight) (277, 278).

Dietary intake of protein, specific types of protein, and patterns of acid and base
precursors have recently been associated with the concentrations of urinary markers

of bone resorption during bed rest (277, 279, 280). In one study with male identical
twins, the relationships between acid and base precursors in the diet and markers of
bone and calcium metabolism during bed rest were investigated (281). With respect

to dietary intake patterns, a strong positive correlation existed between markers of
bone resorption (n-telopeptide [NTX], deoxypyridinoline, anoI pyridinoline) and the ratio
of animal protein to potassium intake during bed rest. A positive correlation existed
between urinary NTX excretion and the ratio of animal protein to potassium intake
during 4 weeks of bed rest (277). No relationship was found between the ratio of
vegetable protein to potassium and markers of bone metabolism. There tended to be

a positive association between these variables before bed rest and during weeks 1 and
2 of bed rest, but the relationship was not significant, likely because of high variability
among the population and small sample size (277). These results document that the
ratio of animal protein to potassium intake was less related to bone metabolism markers
in the group of subjects who exercised and more related to bone markers at the end of
bed rest, when calcium excretion was highest. The results support the argument that
calcium status could have an important role in determining the effect of protein on bone.
If calcium is being resorbed from bone, then acid load can have a more detrimental
effect on bone, similar to what has been observed in other studies of the effect of
high-protein diets on bone (263, 265).

The idea that the levels of acid and base precursors in the diet can affect bone and
calcium metabolism is supported by the results of studies testing the ability of a
supplement containing essential amino acids and carbohydrate (45 g/d essential amino
acids and 90 g/d sucrose) to mitigate muscle |oss (278). The supplement contained 1.5 g
methionine, which is about 1.13 times the recommended daily intake (supplementing the
amount of methionine provided in the diet). The sulfur in methionine is converted in the
body to sulfuric acid, and thus methionine is an acid precursor in the diet. It was evident
that more methionine was broken down than was used by the body because urine pH
decreased in the amino aoid-supplemented group (Figure 21). It was hypothesized that
this |ow-grade metabolic acidosis (282) contributed to the higher urinary concentrations
of bone resorption markers and calcium excretion in the supplemented group.

In a separate study, 13 volunteers were subjected to 60 to 90 days of 6° head-down-tilt
bed rest (283). Net acid excretion, as determined by dietary acid and base components,
was positively correlated with NTX during but not before bed rest (Zwart et al,
unpublished data). Net acid excretion has also been associated with calcium |oss

using meta-analysis techniques (284).

"
"36","?_5 Figure 21. Urine pH (mean i SD) of amino
acid—supp/emented (red ) and placebo
:I: 1' a (blue) groups during 4 weeks of bed rest.
a ' *Significant/y different from before bed
2"" rest (Pre), P < 0.05. #Significant difference
“I E.5 # between groups, P < 0.05. Figure is from
E g.- -,|- 1- Zwart et al, J Appl Physiol 2005 (278).
I-
: am
5.5
Pr: 1 2 3 4
Weeks uf bed rest
The risks associated with protein intake come from deficiency or excess. Deficiency of
protein leads to muscle loss, weakness, wasting, tissue breakdown, inability to perform
the job (including getting out of the spacecraft), and ultimately death. Low-protein diets
can have negative consequences for bone (125, 285-287). Excess protein exacerbates
increased excretion of calcium and the risk of renal stone formation, and is detrimental
to bone. Specific amino acids may additionally increase these risks.
5: “ij..- I F‘..'.[._ . -. ._ ._ -
w . - = | I :5?
I I. . . _ I . __ ll. ..—_u_.
_""_""' E' 'I l l l l -__ I If I
. -_ a_- _ I I j . '2.- #-
MI] ' _ _ .-. ' .
i ‘1'"" :r 1"".“ I - .. - II I _:
I I F: :2 I
“3-3- r‘” '-II-=-
| . . f _ . 4r
k "" ' ' i.
' “' ' 1.. -' .- '5' F! -
j!"" _ I__ .? Ir
__...-""'"": '_I: _..I-"" 1"",” - ' '
f -.__ _ .' ﬁll {7
.-"" I Inf
..-""""'--I--- I fir}. I ""._ . |'-I|.
."" ' .-' I .. ""1,"". -r_ ﬁ' 'i-I_'""L -n"" ""|_:
View of Expedition 30 Flight Engineer Don Pettit in the ISS Node 1 With an edible “friend”
composed of flat bread, peanut butter and chocolate-covered espresso beans.

"
"37",".7 Bone
I

Whereas nutrition is critical for virtually all systems, the interaction of nutrition with bone
is perhaps more extensive and complex than most of its interactions with body systems.
Bone is the body’s reservoir of calcium, which provides structure and strength to bone,
but also provides a ready resource to maintain blood calcium levels during periods with
insufficient dietary provision of calcium. Several nutrients are required for the synthesis
of bone, including protein and vitamins D, K, and C.
Multiple risks are associated with bone loss during space flight. Almost immediately
upon entering weightlessness, bone resorption increases, and calcium (and other
minerals) are released into the blood and urine. This increases kidney stone risk on
short missions, and on longer missions, chronic bone and calcium loss can increase
risks to bone health both in the near term (eg, risk of fractures) and in the long term
(eg, risk of osteoporosis-Iike bone degradation). The International Space Station
provides the opportunity for relatively large numbers of crewmembers to fly on
missions of 4 to 6 months, with even longer missions being planned. At current
capacity, 6 crewmembers are on board at a time: 3 Russian cosmonauts and
3 astronauts from the other partner agencies (Canadian, European, Japanese,
and US space agencies). This number of crewmembers has allowed the effects
of space flight on bone physiology to be documented, along with the testing of
countermeasures aimed at counteracting bone loss.
We provide here an overview of bone and calcium Changes that occur during space
flight, and we review the research efforts made to understand bone loss, including
more detail about specific nutrients. We provide an update on recent countermeasure
studies, which have started to show progress toward meeting the challenge of
mitigating risks associated with bone and calcium Changes during flight.
Bone Loss
Bone is lost during space flight, primarily from weight-bearing bones. This was first
documented on Skylab missions (288, 289), and later on Mir (290-293) and ISS missions
(31, 50, 294). Attempts to come up with a simple way to express the amount of loss
usually estimate it at about 0.5% to 1% per month (291, 292, 295, 296), roughly similar
to postmenopausal bone loss rates over a year. Bone mineral density losses at landing
after 6-month ISS missions are estimated to be 2% to 9% for different bone sites
(297), with significant site-to-site and individuaI-to-individual variability. The bone loss
and mineral shedding are accompanied by an increased risk of renal stone formation
during and after flight (88, 89, 270, 298, 299). The subjeot-to-subjeot variability seems
a Characteristic of space flight-induoed bone loss (300), and as more data are accrued,
may provide insight to find a means to mitigate this loss (301).
Long-term follow-up data on bone recovery are far from complete (302, 303). However,
if the rate of postflight recovery estimated from biochemical data is also assumed to be
constant (reasonable according to ground-based (304) and flight (20, 55) data), then the
rate of recovery is about +100 mg/d (20, 55). By these estimates, on flights up to about

"
"38","6 months, it takes 2 to 3 times the mission duration to recover the lost bone. Analysis

of bone recovery data from duaI-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) analyses suggests
that while regional differences exist, the haIf-Iife of bone recovery after flight is on the
order of 5-9 months after flight (301, 302). For longer exploration missions, however,

the usefulness of these assumptions comes into question, as space flight data are not
available for these durations. Although more data clearly are required to validate this
hypothesis of bone mineral recovery, it nevertheless has significant implications as
mission durations increase. Beyond bone mineral density, questions of Changes to,

and recovery of, bone architecture and strength also remain unanswered.

Bone Metabolism

Bone is a metabolically active tissue, constantly undergoing turnover through
breakdown (resorption) and formation processes. When these 2 processes are

in balance, no net loss (or gain) of bone occurs. Alterations in either, of both,

of these processes can be problematic.

Bone resorption increases during space flight. This wasn’t clearly documented until

the 1990s, when markers specific to resorption were identified and analytical capability
was commercialized. Collagen crosslinks are chemical linkages that give collagen

its strength. These were found to be released during the resorption process and not
metabolized before renal excretion. Many assay variants are available commercially, and
are based on immunoassay techniques that bind to different portions of the molecules.
Increased collagen crosslink excretion, and thus bone resorption, has been shown to be
Clearly increased during space flight (20, 55, 293, 305-308). Earlier studies showed that
plasma concentrations of a similar but more easily confounded marker, hydroxyproline,
were elevated during short-duration Shuttle flights (307) and longer duration Skylab
flights (29, 160, 166). Calcium tracer kinetic studies also provided data indicating that
bone resorption increases about 50% during flight relative to preflight (20, 55) levels.
Bone formation either remains unchanged or decreases during space flight (20, 55, 295).
As indicated by serum concentrations of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase and
osteocalcin, bone formation was unchanged during Mir flights, but increased 2 to 3
months after landing (20, 55). Trends toward decreased levels of bone formation markers
were noted in 2 Mir studies with 1 subject each (293, 306). The results of studies, using
calcium tracer techniques, of bone formation in 3 Mir crewmembers (20, 55) were
equivocal (formation was unchanged or decreased). Together, increased resorption and
decreased or unchanged formation yield an overall negative calcium balance (20, 55).
The exact triggering mechanism for these Changes in bone metabolism during

space flight has yet to be identified, but the physiological and endocrine responses

to the Changes are as expected. The release of calcium from bone suppresses
parathyroid hormone (PTH), which results in lower levels of activated vitamin D
(1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D), which leads to a reduction in calcium absorption from the
gastrointestinal tract. Studies of calcium metabolism were conducted on Mir astronauts,
and indeed, PTH, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and calcium absorption were all decreased
(20, 55, 308). Although it remains important to maintain calcium intake during flight,

the lower calcium absorption during flight suggests that increasing calcium intake

is not a viable countermeasure for weightlessness-induced bone loss, a fact proven

in bed rest studies (309, 310).

Space flight analog studies (such as bed rest) with humans have shown qualitative
effects on bone and calcium homeostasis similar to those shown in flight studies

(300, 31 1), with quantitative effects generally being of smaller magnitude. Effects

"
"39","include loss of bone mass (304, 312-314), decreased calcium absorption (315),
increased urinary excretion of calcium and biochemical markers of resorption

(283, 314-326), increased risk of renal stone formation (87, 322, 326), and decreased
serum concentrations of parathyroid hormone (281, 283, 316, 317, 319, 327) and

1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (281, 315, 316, 319,328).

That bone resorption increases during bed rest has been shown by histomorphometry
(313, 329) and measurement of biochemical markers. Excretion of hydroxyproline
(315, 323, 325) increases during bed rest, and excretion of collagen crosslinks

(281, 283, 305, 314-317, 327) is elevated about 50% above control levels, compared
with the increase of greater than 100% during space flight (20, 55, 305).

The concentrations of biochemical markers indicate that bone formation is unchanged
during bed rest (281, 283, 312, 315-317, 327), but histomorphometry data from bone
biopsies show that bone formation decreases (313, 319, 329). This difference likely
reflects the difference between site-specific (biopsy) and systemic (biochemical markers)
indices of bone formation. After ambulation begins following bed rest, bone formation
generally increases (312, 315). Recent evidence indicates that with bed rest studies

of longer duration (eg, 90 d), bone formation markers tend to increase (283, 314).

In these initial publications, bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BSAP} did not
Change significantly over time, but a retrospective analysis of data from multiple
studies does show a Change in BSAP that reaches statistical significance (Smith

et al, unpublished observations).

Although early animal studies suggested that the primary change in bone metabolism
was related to bone formation, the identification of markers specific to bone resorption
in the late 1980s (330, 331) and the availability of commercial immunoassays in

the 1990s (332, 333) allowed resolution of this matter: bone resorption increases
during space flight and bone formation decreases or does not Change significantly,
substantiating that space flight disrupts the balance between bone resorption and
formation, which can lead to a net loss in bone mass.

Bone Loss Countermeasures

Exercise

|n-flight exercise was first implemented on Skylab missions, largely because this

was the first vehicle to allow enough room for exercise. In addition to in-flight exercise,
ground-based research has been conducted to help document the effectiveness of
exercise as a countermeasure for muscle, bone, and cardiovascular maladaptations that
occur during space flight (202, 311, 334, 335). With respect to bone specifically, treadmill
and cycle exercise devices available on Mir did not prevent bone and calcium loss (20,
55, 292, 336, 337). This result has been attributed to the lack of resistance provided by
these devices, and for the treadmill, the inability to generate sufficient ground-reaction
force in weightlessness (338).

Bed rest studies evaluated many types of exercises and devices, alone or in rare
cases in combination, demonstrating positive effects of treadmill, flywheel, and weight
stacks on maintenance of bone (as assessed by various means from densitometry

to biochemistry) (192, 279, 281, 339-343). Most evidence, from the general scientific
literature as well as space flight analogs, pointed to resistance exercise as the most
likely means of counteracting bone loss during space flight. Heavy resistance exercise
in bed rest protected bone mineral density, but did so not by suppressing the bed
rest-induced bone resorption, but rather by increasing bone formation (Figure 22).

"
"40","‘5 70 E 8°
2 1, 7o
3 5° 3 60
f, 50 __ 9 50
L Q
°- 40 I, s E 40
E I o 30
g 30 ’ \ d: 20
<1 20 ” \\ 2 10 11:- -I
°\° , \ °- 0 .. ‘9‘... .....-}vv.’. .. .......
- 10 z a 1’ ' '
z 0 g -20
o 4-7 10-12 15-17 R+1 R+2 o 6 12 17 R+2
Week of Bed Rest Week of Bed Rest
Figure 22. Bone resorption (as indicated by urinary n-te/opeptide, left panel) and bone formation
(as evaluated by serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase [BSAP], right panel) during 17 weeks
of bed rest with (solid line) or without (dashed line) heavy resistance exercise. Data are expressed
as percentage of pre-bed rest values, and are mean i SD. The vertical line separates the bed rest
and post bed rest periods. Data adapted from (192).
Bed rest studies combining resistance exercise (with a flywheel device) and supine
treadmill exercise while in a lower-body negative pressure (LBNP) Chamber on
alternating days yielded results similar to those shown above, but with about half
the response of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (317) (Figure 23).
100 90
~ - 93
n:
3-5 75 09 g
0 d3
.. , '- 4o
3 50 ‘ - a ‘ ‘ E 30
O s O 20
\° 25 .\° 10 - .. .. ..
L v o -.-r.-.'.'......... .25....
ﬁ 0 % '2123
Z ‘8 -3o
.40
-25 -5o
BR15 BR30 BR58 Post BR30 BR58 Post
Figure 23. Bone resorption (as indicated by urinary n-te/opeptide, left panel) and bone formation
(as indicated by serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, right panel) during 60 days of bed rest
with (solid line) or without (dashed line) a combination of resistance exercise and supine treadmi/I/
LBNP exercise. Data are expressed as percentage of pre-bed rest values, and are mean i SD.
Data adapted from (317).
Attempts to provide resistance exercise on early ISS missions were unsuccessful,
with the interim resistance exercise device (iRED) providing no additional benefit over
the Mir equipment (31, 294). This initial device was deployed on the inaugural ISS
expedition, and time and other constraints did not permit development of all desired
hardware requirements before this expedition was launched. Thus, the appropriately
named interim resistance exercise device was to be used until a more advanced device
capable of allowing heavier loads could be developed, tested, and launched to ISS.

"
"41","= - .. .q_._- -_ ; r1- r *""-""—""
- . ...» .-.-. -w— 9.1-- - '
, . _ s._ -..r-_. I. . -- “.3. -_
e... + r
'I k4 _I%:1l""—""""I.lI n.‘ 'ﬁiﬂil 1--'
. -.-':-.-- -""-""'-'5_ ""‘m-t 'FITI'T""..... L ii! 5-3;. ' ~ .r, I |_
- _ = -. . -_._._‘ III ."" ."" I-I-rr' --‘I::J . _.. Hf.” I """"1 I I .
4.- .""T’r _III .I' K . ”I {I ll ._
ail ' - . In in 1‘ -.-.
. _I . . .. . . E I . L. i .
¢Iﬁ_ II-I III iéi \ III I F i. I..I III . III. II II I * .._.-'.IIII I
rlil |‘- “II, I . ll?“- I - I .|' IHII II 1 'I ..__1 I _ . F .' I - J
41.; - *""FP- ' """"1"" ‘E__‘ ' 1'1 '--""- .31.”, E
-.- . u - LI - .1: Free .. «r ‘
-"" * ' _= r2"" ' '- . . '-:- Hm“ '3 '
Iﬁ'ﬂ _. .=' 1'5: _ I. .. . :j .5. "":31 J - . I I.I:ﬁnil
. Jam _ ”q . ._i .. -~ 1* . *
: 1. . - 1_ . , -.-1._::..--...4 '_ -___ * "" “-9.1%.
I III” ':_'n. I: _ _—_--=I'- T I I. .—'.‘#~' g. . . r [_I_ - .'
Figure 24. Garrett Heisman shown using the interim Resistance Exercise Device (iRED, left), While
Sandy Magnus is shown using the Advanced Resistance Exercise Device (ARED, right) on ISS.
The iRED was launched in 2000 With the first [88 crew, and the ARED replaced it in late 2008.
In 2008, the Advanced Resistance Exercise Device (ARED) was launched to ISS.
This device accommodated additional exercise protocols and had almost twice the
loading capability of iRED (31, 344). Comparing crewmembers exercising with each
device (Figure 24) has been somewhat difficult, given that more recent crews have
maintained their energy intake at levels >90% of estimated requirements, and have
had better vitamin D status than earlier crews. These better nourished crewmembers
exercising with the ARED maintained body mass during flight (and came back leaner,
with less body fat) (Figure 25), and as assessed by DXA (31, 345), maintained bone
mineral density in most regions and in whoIe-body scans (Figure 26).
3 10
m 2:: 2 e
g t: ‘6 t: 5
E O 1 ""' O
>.§ >‘§
330 Ego
a C _ c
g 2 .1 503 .‘c‘
0 ° I- ” .5
"" i .2 2°.
-3 -1o
Mir iRED ARED Mir iRED ARED
Figure 25. Body composition changes (left panel, lean body mass; right panel, total body fat)
in astronauts on Mir and [88 missions. ISS crews had access to either iRED or ARED exercise
devices. Data are expressed as percent change per month of flight and are mean i SD.
Figure adapted from (31).
LL:
n e
Figure 26. Bone mineral density loss E E nun
in astronauts on Mir and [88 missions. 95%
[SS crews had access to either iRED .3 E
or ARED exercise devices. Data are % E 41.5
expressed as percent change per month E a2
of flight. Figure adapted from (31).
-1.u
Mir iRED ARED

"
"42","The number of ISS subjects whose data had been analyzed when the comparison
of exercise devices was published in 2012 was small, in part because many
crewmembers participated in other countermeasure studies and were not included
in this initial analysis. In the time since that initial comparison of crewmembers with
access to the iRED or the ARED was published, another study has confirmed these
findings with a much larger set of data. In 42 astronauts (33 male, 9 female), the bone
mineral density response to flight was the same for men and women (50) (Figure 27),
and those with access to the ARED did not have the typical decrease in bone mineral
density that was observed in early ISS crewmembers with access to the iRED (31).
Biochemical markers of bone formation and resorption responded similarly in men
and women. These recent data are encouraging, and represent the first in-flight
evidence in the history of human space flight that diet and exercise can maintain
bone mineral density on long-duration missions.

0.5
Figure 27. Bone mineral
density (BMD) loss after flight E
in men (N233, open barS) and g E ..E
women (N=9, solid bars) who m E
used either the iRED or ARED u: n
exercise device. Data are E’ E 41.5
expressed as percent Change E 5
per month of flight and are U E
mean i SD. Figure adapted 35: E '1-0
from (50). D-

-1.5

iRED ARED

The bone biochemical Changes in crewmembers exercising with the ARED were very
similar to what had been observed in bed rest studies testing resistance exercise.
That is, the exercise did not affect bone resorption, but did increase bone formation
(31). In the flight study, as published, a significant (P < 0.001) increase occurred (31),
and in bed rest, heavy resistance exercise 6 days a week led to dramatic increases in
bone formation markers (192). In another study with resistance exercise every other
day (combined with a treadmill protocol), subjects had roughly half the bone formation
response (317) of subjects in the first study (192). The exercise also did not have a
significant effect on serum total calcium or urinary calcium. When data from additional
crewmembers became available, these solidified the “trend” into statistical significance
(50). The slow increase in bone resorption over time during flight is likely related to the
fact that the astronaut conditioning and strength trainers were initially reluctant to have
crewmembers exercise too hard with the ARED, to minimize the risk of injury. This slow
and steady increase over time (31) is different from results of the bed rest study, where
formation markers plateaued at the first determination during bed rest (6 weeks of
bed rest) (192).
Although this mode of bone remodeling, with increases in biochemical markers of both
resorption and formation, maintained bone mineral density, it may yield a bone with
strength characteristics different from those that existed before space flight. Studies
to assess bone strength after flight are underway at NASA, to better understand the
results of bone remodeling. Studies are also underway to evaluate optimized exercise
protocols and nutritional countermeasures.

"
"43","Gravity

Other physical countermeasures, including artificial gravity and vibration, have also
been tested in ground-based (bed rest) settings. A more recent and complex study
used centrifugation to create artificial gravity transients during a 21 -day bed rest study
(346). One hour per day of 1 G2 exposure at the level of the heart and 2.5 G2 at the feet
was beneficial for some systems (eg, cardiovascular, muscle) (177, 346, 347), but this
regimen did not have any effect on bone or calcium metabolism (327, 348). Although
greater durations, increased g forces, or combining oentrifugations with exercise
protocols have been proposed, these have not yet been extensively tested (346, 349).
The assumption that it is lack of gravity that stimulates bone loss during space flight
provided the impetus for proposing replacement of gravity by centrifugation (“artificial
gravity”) as a countermeasure for multiple body systems (350, 351), particularly for bone.
The statement has been made that it is known that unit gravity maintains bone, whereas
microgravity does not. A key question is, “How much gravity do we need?” (W. Paloski,
personal communication). In early bed rest studies, 2- or 4-hour intervals of standing

or walking mitigated the increase in urinary calcium excretion associated with bed rest
(352). Some of the artificiaI-gravity studies have relied on short-radius centrifuges (353),
others on rotating exercise devices (349, 354) intended to provide gravitational impact
as well as physical exercise. Artificial gravity or hypergravity has been shown to
positively affect bone, in human and some animal studies (355-357). As noted above,

1 hour per day of centrifugation resulting in 1 G2 at the heart and 2.5 G2 at the feet was
ineffective for bone (327). The optimal artificial gravity prescription for bone, including
dose, duration, and frequency of centrifugation, remains to be Clarified (358), along

with its potential impact on nutrition and related systems (359).

Vibration

Protocols for exposure to vibration, of both high and low frequency, have also been
proposed and tested in space flight analogs. Although |ow-frequenoy protocols showed
promise for protecting bone in both animal and ambulatory human studies (360-362),
the beneficial findings were more limited when testing occurred during head-down-

ti|t bed rest (363). Higher frequency vibration, often referred to as resistance vibration
exercise, has generally shown positive effects on bone and muscle during bed rest
(206, 364-366). Debate continues over the potential of this countermeasure protocol,
amid safety concerns about neuromuscular issues with repeated vibration exposures.
Pharmacological Agents

Pharmacological agents, the most common being the bisphosphonates, have also
been tested for their ability to mitigate weightlessness-induoed bone loss. Many ground
analog studies of bisphosphonates (including bed rest studies and studies of patients
immobilized because of spinal cord injury or other reasons) have been conducted, with
generally positive findings (313, 335, 340-342, 367-374). However, ongoing discussion
and debate surround the relative safety of these compounds for use in otherwise healthy
individuals (astronauts), as opposed to the target population for whom the drugs were
developed (patients with disorders such as osteoporosis). In addition to resolving safety
concerns, investigators have yet to determine the optimal drug, dose, and schedule

of administration during space flight. As noted above with exercise, given that the

bone loss of bed rest is about half that of space flight, there is little reason to believe
that the same dose of drug will have the same effectiveness in both environments.

"
"44","Moreover, data from animal studies suggest that the disuse- or space flight-induoed
increase in bone resorption cannot fully, or chronically, be mitigated by bisphosphonates
(375,376)
Endocrine therapies, including exogenous calcitonin administration (325, 335), have
also been attempted, albeit unsuccessfully. In animal models, testosterone has also
been suggested as a bone loss countermeasure (221, 222) on the basis of limited data
showing a reduction in testosterone concentrations during flight in human, animal, and
cellular models (223-229). Reduction of testosterone, however, has recently been shown
to likely not be a concern during space flight. See section 3, “Muscle and Protein,” for
a more detailed discussion of these data.
Nutritional Countermeasures
One of the most obvious nutritional countermeasures—providing calcium—does not
protect against bone loss (377). This result is likely related to the decreased calcium
absorption seen during bed rest (315, 348) and space flight (20, 55, 308), likely related
to reduced Circulating parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Phosphate
supplementation, used in an attempt to reduce calcium excretion, was also ineffective
(379). Combination therapy with calcium and phosphorus was also unsuccessful at
mitigating bone loss and hyperoaloiuria (325).
Omega—3 fatty acids have been shown to protect bone, in the general population
(113-115) and animal studies (380), as well as in space flight analog studies, including
bed rest (Figure 28) and cell culture (116). While omega-3 fatty acids have not been
studied in a controlled fashion during actual space flight, a positive correlation was
found between fish intake and bone loss in astronauts (Figure 28) (116). That is, those
who ate more fish lost less bone. These data provide additional evidence of the potential
importance of fish oils as a countermeasure for muscle, bone, and radiation risks of
space flight. Studies showing positive effects of omega-3 fatty acids typically look
at intake of fish or other food sources of these nutrients (117-119). Studies of fish oil
supplements added to typical diets often fail to document any benefit (120-122), thus
highlighting the need for dietary modification, and not simply supplementation.
ﬁg 15:: . g 5
._..g ' E d:
: Er 1m: :n ‘5. a --_____--_____-._-__---_!_ -.
.E 1:. :n I I
E E 75 I '3 E I I I I
a g \u i ”.5. I I
E m 5“ I E m -5 I
g E‘ I E E I
g E 25 - ‘5
a: n I E40 '
""""""' [U] {1.5 1.11] 1.5 D 1 2 3 4 5
Average umega-S fattyr acid intake [gfday] Average ﬁsh consumption during flight
during bed rest {# sewingshveelt}
Figure 28. Relationship between omega-3 fatty acid consumption and bone resorption during
bed rest (left panel), and relationship between fish consumption and percent Change in whole-
body bone mineral density at landing in astronauts (right panel). Figures adapted from (116).

"
"45","Other nutrients, specifically sodium, protein, potassium, and vitamin K, have

been documented to have effects on bone, and/or have been proposed or tested

as countermeasures to bone loss (280). These are discussed in detail in other

sections of this book.

Nutrients and Bone Health

Calcium

Calcium metabolism is of critical importance in bone health, and many studies use
calcium determinations as one measure of bone health; however, it has been well
documented that excess dietary calcium will not mitigate bone loss during space flight
(310, 381). Nonetheless, ensuring adequate calcium intake remains important, and the
role of calcium excretion in kidney stone risk must be considered. Two other facets of
calcium Chemistry and biochemistry have been researched, with intriguing findings.
One is related to the impact of calcium in the reclamation of water from urine on
spacecraft, and the other relates to naturally occurring stab|e isotopes of calcium

and their ability to document changes in bone metabolism.

Calcium Balance

Negative calcium balance was observed during the Skylab (29, 160, 288, 321, 382-
384) and Mir (20, 55) missions. During the 84-day Skylab 4 mission, calcium balance
was —200 mg/d (160, 384, 385). Increased urinary and fecal calcium excretion accounts
for most of the calcium deficit (20, 29, 55, 160, 288, 299, 321, 383). Estimates of bone
calcium loss from multiple studies and techniques converge on the suggestion that
about 250 mg of bone calcium is lost per day during flight (20, 55, 160, 386). When this
rate of loss may slow down is not yet known, but it does not appear to be within the first
6 months of flight. For comparison, bone loss after spinal cord injury seems to stabilize
after about 6 to 12 months (387-389), around the duration of many ISS missions.
Vitamin D

The best-understood role of vitamin D is its involvement in calcium metabolism.

One of the major functions of this vitamin is to maintain normal blood levels of calcium
and phosphorus. The liver converts vitamin D to 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Typically the
goId-standard measurement for determining vitamin D status, 25-hydroxyvitamin D

is converted to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in the kidney, and from there it is transported
systemically to target organs. Classic target organs include bone, intestine, and kidney.
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) conducted an extensive review of the literature in 2010
and increased the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for vitamin D to 600 IU/d for
healthy males and females 9-70 years old, and 800 IU/d for those older than 70 years
(390). The main factors that were taken into account were Changes in bone density and
fracture risk. The IOM Committee did not find conclusive evidence that vitamin D plays
a role in extraskeletal health outcomes. Even though a considerable number of papers
published in the past 10 to 15 years have shown associations between vitamin D status
and adverse health outcomes such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, diabetes, cognitive
decline, and aII-Cause mortality, the evidence that vitamin D status causes any of
these outcomes is inconclusive, and insufficient to inform nutritional recommendations
(391 -396). The nonoaloitropio functions of vitamin D may help explain why a robust

set of reproducible data shows an inverse correlation between sun exposure and

"
"46","several types of cancer (397-399). Although 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D is the biologically
active form for the noncalcitropic functions a|so, 25-hydroxyvitamin D must be
available in sufficient quantities for the ‘I-hydroxylase enzyme in nonrena| tissues to
synthesize 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Besides kidney cells, other cell types, including
bone cells, epithelial cells, monocytes, and antigen-presenting cells, also synthesize
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (400). Numerous tissues are affected by vitamin D status
because their cell nuclei contain receptors for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (394). Some

of these tissues are adipose tissue, bone marrow, brain, breast, cancer cells, cartilage,
lung, muscle, ovary, placenta, prostate, stomach, testis, thymus, and uterus (401).
People who are normally exposed to sunlight make vitamin D in their skin. Ultraviolet B
light, a component of sunlight, converts 7-dehydrooholesterol to 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
in the skin (402). Although sunlight has a positive effect on health through its role in
making vitamin D, caution must still be exercised to avoid too much sun exposure
(403-405).

Before 2006, when ISS crews were first provided 400 IU vitamin D/d, it was well
documented that vitamin D status (serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D) decreased after
long-duration space flight (6, 20, 29, 55). The absence of ultraviolet light during space
flight diminishes vitamin D stores in the body, as observed during the 84-day Skylab
mission (29), space station Mir missions (20, 55), and early ISS expeditions (6). Despite
the reported use of vitamin D supplements by some of the astronauts on early ISS
expeditions (average supplement use was 3.0 i 2.8 per week of a 400-IU vitamin

D supplement), the mean serum concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D for the ISS
crewmembers was about 25% less after landing than before launch.

In 2006, vitamin D recommendations to crews increased from 400 IU vitamin D/d

to 800 IU vitamin D /d. |n-flight 25-hydroxyvitamin D data from the Nutritional Status
Assessment Supplemental Medical Objective provide evidence that 800 IU vitamin D/d
is enough to maintain vitamin D status during long-duration space flight (Figure 29)
(31). Furthermore, recent data show that crewmembers who exercised with the ARED,
maintained energy intake at recommended levels, and took 800 IU/d vitamin D during
flight maintained bone mineral density during 4- to 6-month space flights (31).

An ideal ground-based model for individuals lacking ultraviolet light exposure is the
Antarctic, where winter levels of ultraviolet B radiation are essentially zero. Two studies
have been conducted at MoMurdo Station, Antarctica, to determine the dose of vitamin
D needed to sustain serum levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D during a 5- to 6-month

period when there is little to no ultraviolet B exposure, without increasing risks

of hyperoaloemia (406, 407).

Several ground-based studies (performed in Antarctica and at the Johnson Space
Center) provide evidence that a vitamin D dose in the range of 800-2000 IU/d is to|erab|e
and safe, and can maintain vitamin D status for 3 to 6 months even in environments with
no UV light exposure (406-408). This recommendation is in line with the recent Institute
of Medicine recommendations for vitamin D intake for North Americans (390). One
study conducted at MoMurdo Station in Antarctica showed an interactive effect of
serum cortisol and vitamin D status on immune function (407). In that study, subjects
with higher serum cortisol and lower vitamin D status presented with more |atent virus
reactivation in their saliva. It is Clear that vitamin D may have an effect on other systems
besides bone, but further research is required before evidenoe-based recommendations
can be made for other systems.

"
"47","Figure 29. Pre- and postflight data

(mean i SD) from testing required for 3

medical operations show that vitamin D E 15“

status decreased after/ong-duration space. E 125 ____ ___ ___ _____ ________ ----.

flight, despite Vitamin D supplementation With E.

400 lU/d (black dashed line, N216). ln-f/ight '3 “.1

data (purple line) show that 800 lU/d E _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

is enough vitamin D3 to maintain status 3 T5

during long-dLIIrationlspace flight.(/§I=26). . E. 50 W_ _

Red lines depict Institute of MedICIne-deflned H "" ""

lower acceptable limits (With respect to bone g 25

health), and upper advised limit (390). The El:

greenlline at 80 nmol/é/ref/ects‘riI/vhat matny 31-! ﬂ ‘- #3. r? gt .ﬁ §- ,5: '1:-
eI’CGIVG as an O tIma eve WI res eC T'- h.

50 parathyroid hfrmone suppressionpand ﬁﬁﬂ ‘Iﬂ ‘Eﬂ <19 ﬁﬁﬁ qﬂh *- «Elf:

non-bone health outcomes. Figure adapted, q

and data updated, from Smith et a/ (409).

As noted above, vitamin D deficiency is linked to calcium metabolism, and in severe

cases leads to osteomalacia and osteoporosis in adults (and rickets in children).

Throughout the ISS program, supplemental vitamin D has been provided to astronauts

to ensure optimal vitamin D status.

Efforts to provide vitamin D supplements are misinterpreted to infer that this might

be a viable bone loss countermeasure, but this is not the case. Even when vitamin D

stores during flight are adequate, the Circulating concentration of the active form of

vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, is decreased (20, 55). As described in the previous

subsection, “Calcium,” this is likely the result of the increased release of calcium from

resorbed bone, and results in decreased intestinal absorption of calcium. Adequate

stores of 25-hydroxyvitamin D will not affect this. Any attempt to directly provide the

1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, or as in some cases on Earth, excess 25-hydroxyvitamin

D levels, may lead to hypercalcemia, renal stones, soft-tissue calcification, and even

death. Controlled trials in bedridden subjects have also proven that several months

of supplementation fail to affect bone metabolism. In one trial, bedridden elderly people

took supplemental vitamin D (400 or 1200 IU/d compared to placebo) for 6 months.

Little effect was found on parathyroid hormone, and no effect on bone markers (410).

In a similar 40-week trial of 1000 IU of vitamin D2 or D3 (2 groups), neither had an effect

on bone markers (309). The problem of weightlessness-induoed bone loss must be

solved, but vitamin D is not the answer. Nevertheless, even if bone loss is not stemmed,

ensuring an adequate amount of vitamin D will remain important.

As the current space food system includes very few dietary sources of vitamin D,

and vitamin D cannot be synthesized endogenously due to lack of UV light, decreased

vitamin D status is a serious concern for exploration missions that could last 1000 days.

Toxicity of vitamin D is typically less likely to occur than a deficiency (411-414), but

use of supplements would increase its likelihood. Excessive blood levels of vitamin

D can lead to hypercalcemia, which can lead to nephrooaloinosis, arteriosclerosis,

and irreversible soft tissue calcification. In one study conducted in Houston in healthy

individuals, a 50,000 IU/wk dose of vitamin D for 4 weeks and then monthly increased

mean urinary calcium excretion to numbers higher than the normal range (408). In that

study, a daily dose of 2000 IU or a single weekly dose of 10000 IU did not increase

the incidence of hyperoaloiuria.

"
"48","Vitamin K

The function of vitamin K was originally assumed to be strictly limited to involvement

in blood coagulation, but an increasing amount of evidence indicates that this vitamin

affects multiple physiological systems. Vitamin K is a cofactor in the posttranslational

synthesis of y-oarboxyglutamio acid (GLA). y-Carboxyglutamic acid is a constituent of

all vitamin K-dependent proteins, and its role is related to increasing the affinity of the

proteins for calcium (415). Vitamin K-dependent proteins include blood coagulation

proteins and bone proteins (eg, osteocalcin, matrix GLA protein, protein S). On the

basis of findings from Mir in the 1990s and from early ISS missions (described below),

vitamin K had been proposed as a bone countermeasure (416).

Data from 11 US astronauts on ISS Expeditions 1 to 8 (mission durations of 128 to

195 d during 2000-2004) revealed that on landing day their serum phylloquinone

(vitamin K1) was 42% lower than it was before flight, whereas urinary GLA did not

Change (6). In another study, undercarboxylated osteocalcin was elevated (a sign of

vitamin K insufficiency) as early as the eighth day of space flight, and remained high

during 21- and 180-day missions (417). Studies on the EuroMir 95 mission showed

that markers of vitamin K status were decreased after 12.5 weeks of space flight, and

vitamin K supplementation (1 O mg/d for 6 wk) reversed these effects (418). Vitamin

K supplementation elevated GLA and decreased undercarboxylated osteocalcin,

suggesting that vitamin K status was lower during space flight and was improved by

supplementation (417, 418). Despite the Changes on landing day, the monitoring of

vitamin K status during flight has documented no evidence that vitamin K status is

decreased during space flight. |n-flight data from 15 crewmembers on Expeditions

14 to 22 showed no major

Changes in phylloquinone, 4

urinary GLA, or

undercarboxylated osteocalcin E 3

(419). Phylloquinone data 3 :I"" _ - __ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ ,

from those 15 crewmembers '5 “—5

(419) plus an additional 11 g E 2

crewmembers on Expeditions i5.

23 through 31 are shown .1: 1

in Figure 30. Even with the LL

additional data, vitamin K - - - - - - - - I“ .

status did not significantly 5

decrease during flight. $3 33' bﬂﬁé’ gﬁﬁé’ 4.3? .55 +3 I'h'h

This is an important finding, ‘5 w M 1“ {Er (:0 q”

tO document that a Vitamin K Figure 30. Serum phylloquinone before launch (launch

countermeasure to mitigate minus 180 d, or L-180, L-45, and L-10), during flight

a vitamin K deficiency during (flight days 15, 30, 60, 120, and 180), on landing day

Space flight is not needed (R+0), and 30 days post landing (R+30). The dashed

and therefore likely would lines indicate the normal range for phylloquinone.

not have an effect on bone. Data are mean i SD, N=26. Data and N are expanded
from the original publication of these findings (419).

Phosphorus

Phosphorus is an important component of cell membranes and bone mineral.

Phosphate accounts for about 60% of bone mineral (420), and most (85%) of the

body’s extracellular phosphorus is in bone (421). After ISS missions, urinary phosphorus

excretion was about 45% lower than preflight excretion (6).

"
"49","Excretion of phosphorus during untreated bed rest was not Changed (283) from
ambulatory conditions. An earlier study of 3 subjects revealed increased urinary
phosphorus and negative phosphorus balance (323). In bed rest studies, investigators
have attempted to use combination therapy with calcium and phosphorus to mitigate
bone loss and hypercalciuria, with trends in the right direction but no significant
Changes(325)
High phosphorus intake, relative to calcium in particular, can have effects on many
systems, including bone, kidney, and cardiovascular (422-424). Ideally, the ratio of
calcium:phosphorus should be around 1.0, or higher. The ISS requirements match this,
with a notation that the phosphorus:calcium ratio should not exceed 1.5 (2, 425, 426),
based on evidence that a dietary phosphorus:calcium ratio greater than 1.5 is known
to decrease calcium absorption,
which could further impair skeletal 2-:
integrity. Serum phosphorus rises
with increasing phosphorus 2.
intake, and if hyperphosphatemia
occurs, it can result in 1'
calcification of the kidney. 1_
For this reason, ensuring optimal - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.
phosphorus intake during flight 1.
becomes very important (295).
To date, phosphorus intakes 1'2
have been higher than desired. 1_
The standard menu has a P:Ca 1::
ratio of 1.8 (2); actual intakes have ﬁt“ {FIIP Q13? «Eﬁf ﬁﬂ-SP
been slightly lower than that, but
still greater than 1 .5 (Figure 31). Figure 31. Dietary phosphorus:ca/Cium
Bed rest studies have tended ratio in ISS crewmembers during flight
to have P:Ca ratios Closer to (aPPFOX/mal‘e ﬂight days 75, 30, 50, 720,
1_() (unpublished observations). and 180). The dashed line indicates a ratio

of 1.5. Data are mean i SD, N=9.
Magnesium
Magnesium is the fourth most
abundant cation in the body, and more than half of the body’s magnesium is in bone
(427). Adequate intake of magnesium is necessary to prevent hypocalcemia, resistance
to vitamin D, and resistance to parathyroid hormone. Excessive magnesium intake from
supplements has been shown to impair calcium absorption (427).
Decreased urinary magnesium after flight, relative to before flight, seems to be a
hallmark of space flight (29, 428). Serum magnesium trends downward during and after
flight, as seen with Skylab and Shuttle crews (2, 6, 29, 429, 430). After crewmembers
had spent 4 to 6 months in space on ISS, their urinary magnesium was about 45% less
than it was before flight (6).
Autopsy results after the tragic end of the 24-day Salyut-1 mission documented
that, relative to control subjects, the Salyut-1 cosmonauts had 12% to 32% lower
concentrations of magnesium in the compact layer of the femoral epiphysis and
diaphysis, vertebral body, and sternum (431). These Changes were reported as
appearing “with a high degree of certainty.” Magnesium balance was slightly negative
during extended-duration bed rest studies conducted in Russia (341), with little effect

"
"50","of exercise or bisphosphonate. Recent studies conducted in the US have shown

a decrease in magnesium excretion in short- and long-duration bed rest (134, 283).
Magnesium shows promise for reducing the risk of renal stone formation (432).

In ground-based studies, potassium-magnesium Citrate has proven effective in
reducing bed rest-induoed risk (87). Potassium Citrate (KCit) has been successfully
tested during ISS missions (433), and has been “transitioned to operations.” This means
that KCit is part of the flight surgeon’s toolbox for helping crewmembers mitigate rena|
stone risk. That is, it is available on ISS for use based on flight surgeon discretion if
Clinically indicated. However, given that fluid intake for optimum hydration is a preferred
countermeasure, and some residual concerns exist about side effects of potassium
supplementation, it was decided not to routinely provide KCit to crewmembers.

Zinc (and Lead)

Zinc status of astronauts, as assessed by serum zinc and urinary zinc excretion, did

not Change after long-duration space flight (6). Circulating zinc levels are an imperfect
tool to evaluate zinc status, as other physiological factors may affect them (434).
However, to increase the reliability of zinc status evaluation, more intensive and/or
invasive techniques would be required.

The release of zinc from bones (as a result of demineralization) has been noted in

bed rest studies (435, 436), and a similar increase in excretion of zinc was noted

in Wistar rats flown during COSMOS 1129 (a 20-d space flight) (437). This release

of zinc associated with demineralization has raised concern that other metals, including
lead, could also be released secondary to weightlessness-induoed bone resorption
(438, 439). Garcia et aI developed a computer-based model that predicted that blood
lead levels would actually decrease during microgravity exposure. The model predicted,
for the majority of astronauts, that any increase in circulating lead would be more than
offset by decreases in ingested or inhaled lead during the mission (440). Postflight data
supported this model (440).

Unique Aspects of Calcium and Space Flight

Urine Processing and Water Reclamation

The ability to reclaim water from urine will be a pivotal factor in implementing
exploration-class missions. When the prototype Urine Processor Assembly (UPA) on ISS
Clogged due to an unknown precipitate in 2009, the available in-flight urine volume and
calcium excretion data from 24-hour pools and single voids were closely examined (441).
Urine 24-hour volume was about 17% lower during flight than before flight, and urinary
calcium concentration was 50% greater during flight than before flight. The increased
urinary calcium concentration during flight was identified as a primary reason for UPA
failure, and new recommendations for percentage of water to be recovered were made
as a result of those findings. In 2012, when the data were re-evaluated with data from
an additional 10 subjects in a Supplemental Medical Objective study of nutritional status
assessment, it was Clear that crewmembers in recent years are drinking more fluid than
crewmembers did in the past, and as a result urinary calcium concentration is lower.
The UPA extracts water by vacuum distillation, and as a result, the primary concern

for the UPA is the concentration of calcium in the urine, not the amount of calcium
excreted (441). Suggestions for ways to mitigate high calcium concentrations included
exclusion of the first morning void from the system, based on the assumption that this

"
"51","is typically more concentrated than other voids throughout the day. Another suggestion
was administration of bisphosphonates to all crewmembers to reduce calcium excretion.
Calcium concentration data from the in-flight single-void data showed that neither of
these suggestions looked promising for lowering the calcium concentration of urine that
enters the UPA (441). Regarding bisphosphonate treatment, people sometimes have
the impression that the pharmacological blocking of bone resorption will reduce urine
calcium to near zero, but this is not the case. In fact, although urinary calcium
decreased in ISS crewmembers treated with bisphosphonate, it had started higher

in these individuals, so the daily excretion was about the same as for individuals who
did not receive bisphosphonate (345).

When in-flight urinary calcium concentration was examined in light of in-flight mean
fluid intake estimated from the food frequency questionnaire, all but one 24-hour

pool had calcium concentrations below 23.7 mg/dL (the cutoff point for a 75% water
recovery) when fluid consumption was greater than 32 mL fluid/kg body weight.

For the 23 crewmembers in that analysis, that would average to a fluid consumption
(from food and beverages) of 2.5 L/d. In September 2012, a decision was made to
increase recovery from 70% to 74%, which allows a savings of >80 L H20/year.
Natural Calcium Isotope Composition of Bone

Analytical techniques to assess bone health, bone loss, and bone metabolism continue
to evolve with technology. Although densitometry techniques (such as DXA and
quantitative computerized tomography) provide valuable assessment of specific bones,
these techniques detect only relatively large changes in bone, which can take months
to occur, despite the likelihood that biochemical changes are initiated within hours of
exposure to space flight. Studying calcium metabolism requires either intensive balance
studies or tracer kinetic studies, as calcium excretion alone is confounded by too many
factors to be useful in non-controlled studies. Bone formation and resorption markers
provide the ability to assess changes in bone biochemistry, but assessing the relative
association of these 2 factors has not been possible to date, and thus it is difficult to
assess net changes in bone mineral.

A new technique to rapidly detect and quantitatively predict changes in whole-body
bone mineral balance was recently validated in bed rest (442). This technique is based
on natural, biologically induced variations in the presence of the naturally occurring
stable (nonradioactive) calcium isotopes (400a, 420a, 430a, 440a, 460a, and 48Ca), which
react at different rates depending on their mass (443). These variations exist because
bone formation favors the lighter isotopes, and thus the blood and urine (and other
“soft tissue”) tends to have the “heavier” calcium isotopes. Bone resorption, however,
releases whatever calcium is in bone, and that tends to be the lighter isotopes.

Thus, when bone is being resorbed (as it is during bed rest), the urine contains greater
amounts of the lighter calcium isotopes than it did before the increased resorption.
When the isotope ratio technique was applied to a bed rest study, it was shown that
the calcium isotope ratio shifted in a direction consistent with bone loss after just

7 days of bed rest, long before detectable changes in bone density occur. Consistent
with this interpretation, the calcium isotope variation accompanied changes observed
in n-telopeptide, whereas bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, a bone-formation
biomarker, was unchanged (442).

As the relationship between calcium isotopes anol whole-body bone mineral balance is
well established (444-446), this relationship can be used to quantitatively translate the
changes in the calcium isotope ratio in urine to changes in bone mineral density using

"
"52","a simple model. Using this model it was estimated that subjects lost 0.25 i 0.07%
(1 SD) of their bone mass from day 7 to day 30 of bed rest (442). This rate of loss
extrapolates to a loss of 1.36 i 0.38% of skeletal mass over 119 days, which is
equivalent, within error, to bone loss rates determined by DXA scans in Iong-term
(119-d) bed rest studies (314).
Given the rapidity with which calcium isotope measurements detect change and their
potential for use in assessing bone loss, this technique is ideally suited for space flight
studies in which changes in bone formation and resorption are not only being altered
by space flight itself but are being manipulated by various countermeasures.
-"":“~i-‘ -‘--'_._'_r-I-'T:I""
—_. I .' I. __ _ _ _ _ _ . ﬂ _. 1w . -
.. . _ ._H—E-_H_ Q..."" .. {'3 ﬂ 1%.! ._ _
-_ - 3.... -_ I.-_-_—""'+
|_1 #- u: ..- .ﬂ: -- '._I.. '35! 1* .._: .IT:- “-12%;- —i' #l
ﬂ 1‘ "" 11-1th '- I'IITI- ""'- I:' 1 :‘ﬁ .& H. .._111-11
_- '- r"" 1' .- w '1' '-‘~=. at? J ""1 _ 1“ r
--*'- _. .- a-.- -' :5: '- --::H~- -
""""""1':1""-'.~. ._'.- _. r2. "": .
ﬁt y 1;. i- n ..
I-"" ‘3: I :11 a; ' ‘ —
“ .‘ _ '1 __
1--_ i ha 5 '—
3'"" r 1 ""-'—'_.
-; ' ' ""-11 -
'_' i 5...;- - _—: .. :- . __.'1F""
“'5. _ I -. 1 ..g-I-I' I. - I .I'"".I
m h}; I - f _ :
ISS flight control team celebrating and toasting the first drink of the on-board water reclamation
system on the space station during Expedition 19.

"
"53","i: Iron and Hematology
Iron
Iron is an essential element involved in oxygen transport, oxidative phosphorylation
in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and electron transport in cytochromes and
cytochrome oxidase (447, 448). Adequate iron is crucial for meeting the needs of organs
and tissues, but excess iron is detrimental to cells and can cause oxidative damage.
The body achieves iron balance through regulation of absorption by enterocytes in
the intestine and regulation of iron export from cells. Once iron is absorbed into the
enterocyte, it can be bound to ferritin and stored. Serum ferritin has been shown to be
a sensitive indicator of iron stores (449). Ferritin is exponentially correlated with storage
iron, as determined by quantitative phlebotomy in patients with iron overload (450).
Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency worldwide, but iron toxicity
is also worthy of concern. Deficiency of iron leads to anemia, fatigue, reduced work
capacity, impaired behavior and intellectual performance, cognitive deficits and memory
loss, heart palpitations, impaired thermoregulation, and decreased immune function
(451 -453). Toxicity of iron may lead to tissue damage or cancer. High iron intakes
have also been related to gastrointestinal distress. The toxic potential of iron derives
from its ability to exist in 2 oxidative states (ferrous and ferric forms). Iron serves as a
catalyst in redox reactions; however, when these reactions are not properly modulated
by antioxidants or iron-binding proteins, cellular damage can occur (454). Adaptation
of iron metabolism in humans typically allows the maintenance of normal body iron
concentrations in spite of disparate physiological requirements and dietary supply (455).
Body iron, about 4 g in the adult human, is determined by physiological iron demands,
dietary supply, and adaptation (447, 455, 456). Dietary iron is a function of both content
and bioavailability of total food iron; bioavailability is lower in non-heme than in heme
iron sources. Dietary factors that inhibit iron absorption include tea, coffee, bran,
calcium, phosphate, egg yolk, polyphenols, and certain forms of dietary fiber (447).
Conversely, meat, fish, poultry, and ascorbic acid will enhance the bioavailability
of non-heme iron.
Iron is known to be involved in immune system function—specifically, adaptive and
innate immune response—and both iron overload and iron deficiency affect immune
function. As reviewed by Dao and Meydani, iron overload can affect susceptibility to
infection (457). On the other hand, iron deficiency affects the function of certain immune
cells, including neutrophils and natural killer cells, and production of cytokines (457).
As with any nutrient, supplementation must be used with caution, as some have found
that in areas of the world where infection rates are high, such as malaria-endemic
regions, iron supplementation can actually increase risk of infection, suggesting that
the supplemented iron provides an environment for pathogens to thrive (458). Others
have shown that iron deficiency can help protect against some types of infections (459).
Evidence from short- (weeks) and Iong-duration (months) space missions shows that
red blood cell (RBC) mass decreases during flight because of neocytolysis (460, 461).
An early hypothesis for the cause of decreased RBC mass was that RBC synthesis

"
"54","in space was understimulated relative to synthesis on the ground (462). Decreased
release of mature RBCs into the circulation is associated with a decrease in circulating
erythropoietin concentrations. Serum erythropoietin decreases in the first few days of
space flight, but it returns to preflight |eve|s later and iron turnover is unchanged during
flight (461, 463), indicating that synthesis of RBCs and hemoglobin is unchanged.

A consequence of the decreased red blood cell mass is the subsequent transfer of

the iron from newly synthesized cells into storage proteins and processes. Evidence

of this includes increased circulating concentrations of serum ferritin, an index of iron
storage, after short- and long-duration space flights (6, 430, 464). In addition to these
physiologic changes that can affect tissue iron stores, dietary iron content is very high

in the International Space Station (ISS) food system, largely because many of the
commercial food items in the ISS menu are fortified with iron (2). The mean iron content
of the standard ISS menu is 20 i 6 mg/d, and individual crewmembers have had intakes
in excess of 47 mg/d for some weeks during long-duration missions. For reference,

the defined space flight requirement for iron is 8-10 mg/d for both men and women

(2, 425), and the current US Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) for men is 8 mg/d and the
DRI for women is 10 mg/d (465). The to|erab|e upper intake limit for iron as defined

by the Institute of Medicine is 45 mg/d (465).

Indices of iron metabolism and erythropoiesis return toward norma| relatively quickly
(days) after landing, although the replenishment of RBC mass may take several weeks.
The repletion of RBCs usually occurs after the disproportionate return of plasma volume,
so that a dilutional “anemia” often occurs after flight (466). For example, a 3% to 5%
decrease in hematocrit between landing (R+O d) and R+3 days is common after both
short- and long-duration flights (466).

Although the in-flight decrease in RBC mass is substantial, the efficient postflight
recovery suggests that the change represents an adaptation to weightlessness. After the
first weeks of flight, RBC mass and body fluid volumes reach new plateaus (lower than
on Earth), as shown by data from long-duration flights (35, 428, 467, 468). The triggering
mechanism for these changes is unknown. One hypothesis is that the body senses a
decreased requirement for blood volume and adapts accordingly. This may be related to
changes in fluid (circulatory) dynamics and reduced gravitational strain on the circulatory
system during flight, which may result in easier delivery of oxygen to tissues, or to the
decreased plasma volume and increased concentration of RBCs in the first few days of
space flight. The decrease in BBC mass has no documented functional consequences.
|n-flight data show that iron stores increase early during a mission (within 15 d) and then
return to preflight concentrations by the end of a 6-month mission (469). In a recent
study with 23 crewmembers of missions 50 to 247 days in duration, ferritin increased
about 220% in women and 70% in men by flight day 15 (469). At several time points,
the transferrin index exceeded 1 pmol iron/pmol transferrin, which provides evidence
that iron overload occurred (470). Other acute-phase proteins (C-reactive protein and
ceruloplasmin) were not changed during flight, indicating that the ferritin response was
likely not just an inflammatory response. In this study the amount of increase in ferritin
(area under the curve) was associated with the change in bone mineral density after
flight, which was supported by the association between ferritin and other markers of iron
status and markers of bone resorption. The greater the increase in ferritin during flight
(or the longer it was elevated; either case would result in a greater area under the curve),
the greater the decrease in bone mineral density in the hip, trochanter, hip neck, and
pelvis after long-duration space flight (469). The change in ferritin over the course of

"
"55","a 6-month mission is presented am 15”.
in Figure 32, and is very H

. . . . n 15:: m
Similar to the Change In urinary E: 1m 2;
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine g 10:: %
(8OHdG, a marker for oxidative a: 5n , - _ 5:] g
damage) during space flight). ‘g f 'u -_ :“r
These data are important TE n l"" “ . n g
to show that mean ferritin I .541 ‘ 3
concentrations during flight
that were not outside the '1“ a 1:. ""F' a 1? ”q. ""5. '59
normal Clinical range were qt 'Ed‘ ‘5‘ iﬁqﬁﬂ *9"" q"" i5
aSSO9'at‘?d Wlth eVIdence Figure 32. The percent Change from pref/ight
Of OXIdatlve damage and (mean i SD) in serum ferritin (red Circles, solid line)
bone resorption, and this is and urinary BOHdG (blue squares, dashed line)
supported by other studies before, during, and after long-duration space flight
in healthy ground-based (N=23). “Pre” was determined from the mean of
populations (471 -473)_ pref/ight data points (3 for ferritin, 4 for BOHdG),

and percent Change was calculated from that

Bed rest studies have not average. (459)
proven to be consistently
reliable models for the
hematological Changes of space flight. Early bed rest studies showed a decrease in
RBC mass during bed rest, but erythropoietin was unchanged and hematocrit increased
(474), suggesting that the mechanisms that bring about hematological Changes during
bed rest are different from those that act during flight. If the reduced RBC mass
during flight is caused by the reduced gravitational load on the circulatory system, it
is reasonable to assume that bed rest alone would not alleviate these forces, but would
only reposition them. More recent studies have shown small Changes in iron status
measurements, the most consistent being a drop in hematocrit and hemoglobin after
reambulation (134, 283), suggesting an impact of plasma volume replacement, with
a smaller role of hematopoiesis.
Another model is provided in studies involving Changes in altitude, where the descent
from high to low altitude induces changes similar to those observed for space flight
(decreased red cell mass, increased iron storage) (475). Exogenous erythropoietin
prevented the Changes (475), suggesting that it is involved in the regulating mechanism,
as it may be in the initial Change in space flight.
The NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO) undersea environment
provides an excellent space flight analog for changes in iron status, specifically with
respect to the environment in the NEEMO habitat (476). Because of the increased air
pressure in the habitat, crewmembers are exposed to higher oxygen pressures, which
increase their risk for oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, and lipids (477-480). Probably
because of the increased pressure and greater oxygen availability, body iron stores
are elevated during the saturation dive (6, 464). Serum ferritin is routinely increased
during the NEEMO saturation dives (10-14 d long), and evidence for oxidative damage
and stress is also observed (476). On a recent NEEMO mission, red blood cell folate
was decreased during the dive, and plasma folate status was inversely correlated with
serum ferritin (481). Decreased superoxide dismutase activity and peripheral blood
mononuclear cell poly(ADP-ribose) were also evident during the dive, indicating a
DNA repair response occurred (481).

"
"56","The implications of moderately increased iron stores in the body include exacerbated
bone loss, oxidative stress, cardiovascular disease, and cataracts or other ophthalmic
issues. For example, ground studies show that in healthy subjects, increased body

iron stores (assessed by measuring serum ferritin) were related to the rate of change

in regional bone loss over a 3-year period (482). This finding supports what we have
observed during space flight (469). Other risks with iron overload are retinal degeneration
and cataract risk (483). We have seen that, in rat studies of iron loading plus radiation
exposure, increased oxidative damage occurs in the retina as well as systemically and
in the liver (484). Furthermore, the formation of free radicals subsequent to elevation of
iron stores has been linked on Earth to cardiovascular disease and cancer. Although
aspects of some of the evidence supporting this thesis contradict each other (485, 486),
a correlation between coronary heart disease and iron status has been described in a
number of recent studies (487-489), and an association between increased incidence
of myocardial infarction and increased iron stores (as measured by serum ferritin) has
been observed (489, 490). In a prospective Finnish study, increased risk of all cancer
types combined and colorectal cancer in particular was associated with high iron stores
(491). The relationship between iron, lipids, and cancer has also been documented in
the Framingham study (492). A relationship has also been indicated between excessive
iron stores and ascorbic acid deficiency; when reductions in ascorbic acid occur, vitamin
A and selenium tend to exacerbate iron-induoed peroxidation processes (493). These
data suggest that the alterations in erythropoiesis and iron metabolism that occur in
microgravity could cause significant changes affecting crew health.

Better Characterization of iron metabolism during space flight with respect to other
systems is warranted because of the high levels of dietary iron, the increase in iron
stores early during flight, and the potential for iron to act as an oxidizing agent during
space flight, complicated by increased radiation levels. It is known that bacterial
virulence increases upon exposure to microgravity (494), and ground studies also

show that increased iron status can increase risk for infection (495). Investigating the
increase in iron status during flight with respect to Changes in immune function will be
an important next step in understanding the implications of elevated iron status during
space flight. Furthermore, iron absorption has yet to be determined during flight.
Copper

Copper is an essential cofactor for enzymes involved in energy production, metabolism
of oxygen and iron, maturation of the extracellular matrix and neuropeptides, anol
neuroendocrine signaling (496). Deficiencies in copper have implications for bone health,
the nervous system, immune function, the cardiovascular system, and lipid metabolism
(496). The involvement of copper in bone health is specifically related to |ysy| oxidase
function and collagen synthesis (271, 496).

Copper is not usually stored in tissues, but liver, brain, and kidney typically contain

the largest amounts per unit tissue mass (496). Total body copper is about 50 to

120 mg (O.79-1.9 mmol) (497). Copper transport and regulation involve the blood
protein oeruloplasmin.

Frank copper deficiency is rare in human populations consuming a normal diet;
however, copper deficiencies have been noted in infants fed milk formulas, infants
recovering from malnutrition and fed cow’s milk, and patients receiving total parenteral

"
"57","nutrition for a prolonged period (498). Six patients fed (through the gastrointestinal

tract) a diet containing 15 pg oopper/100 koal for 12 to 66 months (499) developed

a copper deficiency.

When copper deficiency occurs it leads to normocytic, hypochromic anemia; decreased
production of leukocytes and neutrophils; and defects in connective tissue (specifically
in collagen synthesis) that can lead to vascular and skeletal problems and central
nervous system dysfunction, or even death (498). Heartbeat irregularities have also been
reported in cases of copper deficiency (500). Deficiency symptoms, including macrocytic
anemia, bone abnormalities, and decreased neutrophil production, have been reported
in subjects with serum copper concentrations ranging from 0.9 to 7.2 pmoI/L (499).
Toxic concentrations of copper lead to oxidative damage, gastrointestinal distress,

liver damage, or even death (496).

Serum copper and ceruloplasmin of ISS crews have been determined as part of the
medical requirement to assess nutritional status in long-duration orewmembers, with

no significant Changes observed after flight (6). |n-flight determinations of copper status
have not yet been reported.

One Russian report on the effect of space flight on copper content of bones (431)
documented “non-uniform Changes” in copper content of bone from different regions
after flight relative to nonflight controls. Copper content of the femoral epiphysis was
81% to 159% greater, while the amounts of copper in the vertebral body and sternum
were 36% and 58% less, respectively. (T his study reported on the autopsy results after
the tragic end of the 24-day Salyut-1 mission, relative to controls.)

During a 17-week bed rest study, copper balance was unchanged, but after
re-ambulation it increased (435). During and after 3 weeks of bed rest, serum copper
and ceruloplasmin were unchanged (134). After 90 days of bed rest, serum copper

was slightly elevated, but the Change was statistically significant (283). In 60- and
90-day bed rest studies, ceruloplasmin was unchanged (283).

Changes in copper status could contribute to the effects of space flight on bone, red
blood cells, and iron status. The Changes in bone during space flight, described in this
volume, could be exacerbated by copper deficiency and impaired collagen synthesis.
Anemia of space flight is manifested as a reduction in Circulating red blood cell mass
with elevations in serum ferritin and iron concentrations (35, 461). Since copper is
required for iron mobilization and absorption, alterations in copper status may affect
iron and red blood cell changes during flight.

Appropriate amounts of certain nutrients, copper in particular (501), are vital for
maintaining normal immune function. The immune system seems to be altered during
space flight (77, 502-505), and this may have direct or indirect (when alterations are
induced by stress or radiation) implications for nutrition and nutritional status as
possible causes or effects (503, 506).

No information about copper absorption and metabolism during space flight is available,
but, given the available ground data, obtaining such information is not a high priority at
this point. Ensuring adequate copper content of the diet and verifying that the flight data
on copper status follow ground trends are important monitoring steps.

"
"58","IIIII . ' I u . - '.|-.__ 1.. .
I _ _- -. h.
'. ""‘ I' I' . .
| .
. 1. ,_ . _-
._ . ._‘l .1"" _ l:
.. ""- ____ .. - :I-I-
-- _'r ‘ .. L: ""4:. .' {-9. h _ ..
u‘ ' i . - I“...
. . .'_ _ 1‘- |- . _ . i _ _ 1—- _. hall.
- E“ .5.- q 4""“ . .-
_ __‘_ - -\. . *‘
.I_ I _ :- . _ ii .1; .
__ I ""F; ,_ . _ .'
flaaiﬁii'fﬁwh .l _r I. ll. ll _ - .1 __
.. :1. .:.:f!.'r-I'r:.':-p-.1I If! I . .' III- ||||- , -l‘ - _ _ __ _
Josef F. Schmid, NASA flight surgeon, comes face-to-face With a grouper through the observation
Window of his undersea habitat during the 12th NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations
(NEEMO) mission aboard the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration '3 Aquarius
Underwater Laboratory, Which is operated by the University of North Carolina at Wilmington
and located off the coast of Key Largo, Florida.

"
"59","( Cardiovascular Health

Cardiovascular issues are a key concern for space travelers (507-513), but the role of
nutrition in cardiovascular adaptation has not (yet) been well Characterized. In a few
areas there is some degree of evidence (described below), but many more have yet to
be examined. It is worth noting that multiple studies are being planned or are underway
on ISS and in bed rest models that may help shed light on this area in the near future.
Energy
As discussed in section 2, “Energy and Fuel Metabolism,” striking data show that
cardiovascular deconditioning and loss of plasma volume are negatively correlated
with energy consumption during bed rest (63) and after space flight (Figure 33).
That is, insufficient energy intake is associated with greater plasma volume loss and
cardiovascular deconditioning. The space flight data came from the work of Dr William
Carpentier, who evaluated crewmember medical records from the Mercury, Gemini,
and Apollo programs. These data have yet to be published in the scientific literature,
but a book in which they are compiled is in final development.
Dr Carpentier’s data from astronauts in the early US space programs have been
integrated and modeled to predict postflight heart rate response to lower body negative
pressure (LBNP), standing, and tilt from factors including flight duration, plasma volume
loss or energy intake, and preflight resting heart rate. The plots in Figure 33 and Figure
34 are based on Gemini and Apollo mission data. Combined with the data presented
in Figure 35, these data Clearly link energy intake and plasma volume loss with
cardiovascular health during and after space flight.

33 "" T y = 4.9:: + 12?.2
E TI] r = D.?S [peﬂﬂﬂ‘ij
E an
E 5:] T
ﬂ 3“ T
E 20 T ' v t 1r
a 1n ""'

ﬂ —---———---———--Ir—-l'——- —'——--———-
‘3 -‘ID 1r 1'

-2ﬂ

15 2t] 25 30 35 40

Energy intake {kcali‘kgid}

Figure 33. Relationship between energy intake
(kcal/kg body mass/d) and plasma volume loss
(mL/d) during Apollo missions. N = 21. Data are
courtesy of William Carpentier,

"
"60","E 1m}
:- 1 LBNP {AME}
E II E 1 Standing mitinn {Apalln}
15E _ . . _
E i Ir H Ti“ pusmun {Gamlnll
E * -
.- 12lilI
En '-‘
u.- I
E m a _
. """" F1111 1: - 1m
E El} r = [LE {mum‘s}
E El} HI 12H 15D 1|!!!
Prudlctud puatﬂlnht hurt rat: lhpm't
Figure 34. Postf/ight heart rate under 3 conditions, predicted (from factors including
plasma volume loss) versus actual measured heart rate. These data were calculated from
the following equations:
LBNP: 29.00 — (0.064 X flight duration) + (1.45 X resting pref/ight heart rate) + (4.2553 X plasma
volume loss, mL/h flight)
Standing: 77.23 — (0.52 X flight duration) + (1.9098 X pref/ight resting heart rate) + (17.4758 X
plasma volume loss, mL/h flight)
Tilt: 330 — (2.53 X pref/ight resting heart rate) — (7.20 X plasma volume loss, mL/h flight) —
(0.078 X flight duration, h)
Heart rates for LBNP and tilt were those recorded at LBNP = -50 mm Hg and at 70° ti/t.
For the stand test, crewmembers stood relaxed against a wall with their heels 6 inches
away from the wall. Data are courtesy of William Carpentier.
E
3- 13::
E l LBNP [Apallnlt
E 151:! i I Etandlng pnslﬂnn [Apmln]
‘5 Hr Till pusitinn {Gemini}
E! I i
5 12:: a
a u-
_ l I
g m. . _
n. .- II‘ F1014: - 1.252!
E El] It I = I135 [piEI-ﬂﬂﬂ
E ED an 12:: 15a 13a
Pradlctad pnltﬂlght hurt rate [hpm]
Figure 35. Postf/ight heart rate, predicted (from factors including energy intake) versus
actual measured heart rate. These data were calculated from the following equations:
LBNP: 63.02 + (1.18 X pref/ight resting heart rate) + (0.48 X energy intake, kcal/d/kg) —
(0.17 X flight duration)
Standing: 1 15.87 + (1.12 X pref/ight resting heart rate) — (2.17 X energy intake, kcal/d/kg) —
(0.17 X flight duration)
Tilt: 239.48 — (0.75 X pref/ight resting heart rate) — (1.86 X energy intake, kcal/d/kg) —
(0.052 X flight duration)

"
"61","Similar findings relating energy intake and cardiovascular deficits were obtained from

bed rest studies led by Dr Martina Heer to evaluate the effects of hypocaloric diets on

many physiological systems (61, 183). The cardiovascular data showed that caloric

restriction during bed rest led to decrements in cardiovascular physiology (specifically,

performance on a stand test), exceeding the decrements that occurred during bed rest

when subjects received adequate calories (unpublished results).

One piece of the space

flight puzzle that is still 5”

missing is the effect of E 5|] 1.

flight duration. That is, the n'- 2'

data presented in Figure ﬁ g 4n I. H

33, Figure 34, and Figure .5 g- _ __ __ _ ﬂ... __ _ _ _ _

35 were generated from :-. 1:: 3|] +- i 5.-

short-term flights, and this El '3] '

relationship may Change on '= 5F. El] '1' 'l

. . . m — .-

Ionger ISS mlssmns. Given 3 “ID

the inference from Figure 33 E.

that energy intake should [I

be greater than 33 kcaI/kg

body mass to avoid plasma Figure 36. Energy intake during space flight on ISS

volume loss, we evaluated ISS missions (N256). Each point represents an individual

intake data (Figure 36) and crewmember, and is their reported average daily energy

found that few crewmem bers intake over the course of the mission. The dashed line

are m eetin 9 this threshold. represents 33 lfcal/kg body mass, the energy Intake
needed to WOW plasma volume loss. Solid lines
represent the mean i 180.

Magnesium

As mentioned in other sections, magnesium has benefits for metabolism of bone and

calcium and for reduction of renal stone risk. In addition, magnesium has been shown

to have effects on the cardiovascular system (514-516). Consistently decreased

magnesium excretion after flight is a concern for many reasons (see section 4, “Bone,”

for details), and warrants further investigation with respect to cardiovascular

deconditioning during and after flight.

Ongoing and Future Research

Oxidative Stress

The role of oxidative stress and antioxidants in cardiovascular adaptation to space flight

is currently being studied on ISS. Although astronauts are exposed to several oxidative

stressors during flight (eg, radiation, EVA, iron stores, exercise), abundant evidence

exists of additional oxidative stress during space flight (reviewed later), and a wealth

of literature reports effects of oxidative stress and damage on the cardiovascular system

on Earth, these three areas have never been evaluated. A study initiated on ISS in 2013

aims to accomplish this goal, evaluating oxidative damage during flight, as well as

evaluating Iong-term effects after flight.

The findings from these studies may have significant implications for future missions.

As described later in this book, oxidative stress is a multifaceted issue that affects many

systems, and given the radiation concerns of exploration-class missions, it will draw

greater attention in the future.

"
"62","Omega-3 Fatty Acids
Omega—3 fatty acids have a Clear beneficial impact on cardiovascular health on Earth,
but such effects have not been evaluated during space flight. Nonetheless, the initial
efforts being made to increase fish and omega—3 fatty acid intake in astronauts for the
benefit of other systems (bone, muscle) will likely have positive effects here as well.
Healthier Diets
While individual nutrients are easier to study in a controlled, experimental fashion,
the effect of overall dietary quality is one topic continuing to gain ground, particularly
as studies of individual supplements fail to produce the “magic” supplement. Overall
dietary quality, including fruit and vegetable intake, fish (omega—3 and vitamin D) intake,
and intake of foods rich in phytochemicals and lower in sodium, has broad health effects
(517-522). Many of these effects clearly have an impact on the cardiovascular system,
along with benefits for bone, muscle, kidney, and other systems.
In 2014, NASA embarked on an “Integrated Nutrition” study, aimed at providing healthier
food options for astronauts on ISS missions. As of this writing, it is hoped that the first
flight of this experiment will be in 2015. Bone is a primary end point, but Clearly this
study will have implications for many other physiological systems (eg, cardiovascular,
muscle, immune) and other risks of space flight (eg, radiation and oxidative stress),
not to mention potential benefits for crew performance and morale. The outcome of
this study will provide a solid backdrop for the definition of food system and nutrient
requirements for exploration missions, and may also have significant implications for
understanding the role of nutrition in disease prevention here on Earth.
A “f ""'
- |\ E {H .:'
a i“;
1 III . I .I 1|- 1""“ .
i- “ f; . ‘1 “'5
.. _ 1 K ' "" ‘ 1
___ -- ‘ .’ I' l1
_ ___ - . 1
___ . . .. .
m; - __ . i 1..-
NASA astronaut Karen Nyberg, Expedition 36 flight engineer, eats a meal at the galley in the Unity
node of the International Space Station.

"
"63","Sodium, Potassmm, Fluid,

and Renal Stone Risk
Sodium and Chloride
Sodium is the major cation of extracellular fluid (523). Together with Chloride, sodium
is used by the body to maintain normal water distribution, osmotic pressure, and anion-
Cation balance in the extracellular fluid compartment (524). Electrolyte concentrations
in the body are essential for proper cardiovascular function and are under renal and
hormonal control (525). Increases in blood sodium levels can be caused by diabetes,
renal polyuria, diarrhea, insufficient water intake, excessive sweating, or increased
dietary sodium intake. Sodium levels decrease with edema, excessive water intake,
vomiting, diarrhea, diuretic therapy, renal tubular damage, hyperaldosteronism, or
lower dietary intake.
For the normal adult, total body sodium averages about 60 mmol/kg body weight.
Forty to 45 percent of total sodium resides in bone, with the balance found in
extracellular and intracellular fluid. These sodium stores are Classified as either
exchangeable (42 mmol/kg body weight) or nonexchangeable, the exchangeable
stores being composed of all cellular sodium and less than half of bone sodium (526).
Exchangeable sodium becomes available by diffusion when plasma sodium levels
become low, and in states of edema, the exchangeable sodium stores absorb sodium.
Animal studies show that symptoms of sodium deficiency occur after 3 to 4 weeks
of dietary sodium restriction (527). During acute starvation, urinary sodium excretion
decreases to less than 0.2 9 within 10 days (528), and can be affected by the amount
of sweat (529). Plasma sodium levels are maintained fairly well during acute starvation:
an initial decrease is followed by a return toward normal values (530). Maintenance
of blood sodium is also observed during semi-starvation. During the Minnesota
Experiment, plasma sodium levels in samples taken after the 6-month semi-
starvation period were 0.6 i 7.3% higher than baseline levels (N = 4) (529).
Six days of undernutrition resulted in large negative balances of sodium chloride
(—12.8 i 3.6 g/d), likely related to Changes in water balance (529).
Pre-, in-, and postflight plasma sodium and chloride data are available from Apollo,
Skylab, and Shuttle flights, and have been reviewed extensively (2, 21, 531 -534).
|n-flight daily sodium intakes during Skylab and Shuttle missions averaged 4 to 5 g,
and were similar to the astronauts’ preflight intakes (32). The current food system is
high in dietary sodium, and typical intakes on ISS have been in excess of 4.5 9, even
with suboptimal food intake (6). Intakes as high as 7 to 10 g of sodium per day have
been observed. Sodium homeostasis and blood sodium levels are maintained during
real and simulated space flight (535), but the high sodium content of the current
space food system makes it important to monitor and restrict dietary sodium intake
of astronauts to maintain their bone and renal health.
European studies with Mir crewmembers documented positive sodium balance during
space flight, in a non-osmotic fashion (that is, without a concomitant increase in fluid
compartments) (21, 30, 533, 534, 536, 537). These data were confirmed in a series of
ground-based studies, documenting an increase in messenger RNA expression of some

"
"64","of the enzymes required for glycosaminoglyoan syntheses in the skin, the displacement
of sodium by hydrogen in the glycosaminoglycans, and a subsequent acidosis
(537-543). These findings of increased sodium-proteoglycan binding had already

been observed in animal studies by Ivanova in the 1970s (544). The skin here functions
as a reservoir that stores sodium in case of overconsumption and releases sodium
when it is insufficiently supplied. In recent studies carried out by the group of Titze et

al (538, 539, 541) in animals and summarized in a mini-review (541), they demonstrated
the involvement of the lymph capillary system in the clearance of sodium and Chloride
from the skin. Increasing density of lymph capillaries in the skin seemed to play one of
the key roles in this Clearance, and when hyperplasia of the cutaneous lymph capillary
system was inhibited, skin sodium and Chloride retention was augmented and led to
increased blood pressure.

Sodium is also stored in bone; however, sodium stored in bone does not seem to

be exchangeable and therefore does not take part in day-to-day sodium regulation.
However, on Earth, excessive sodium intake has been associated with increased bone
turnover (545-547). Dietary sodium is known to affect calcium homeostasis (548-553).
A predictable relationship exists between urinary sodium and calcium; that is, for

each 100 mmol of sodium excreted in urine, 1 mmol of calcium is excreted (554).

This phenomenon is expressed at high levels of dietary sodium. More than 90% of
dietary sodium is absorbed, even when intake is high (555). Sodium is excreted mostly
in the urine, but about two-thirds of the sodium filtered by the kidney is reabsorbed

by mechanisms thought to involve solvent drag and electrochemical gradients.

The sodium-dependent calcium transport system uses the energy stored in the
electrochemical gradient of sodium to drive calcium into the lumen of the proximal
renal tubule, and ultimately the presence of calcium in this location leads to increased
calcium |oss secondary to increased sodium excretion. In the distal tubule, calcium is
preferentially reabsorbed, an event stimulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH) and cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP) (556). Cyclic AMP also influences reabsorption
of sodium (557).

A small amount of sodium is excreted in feces. When 550 mmol sodium was ingested
each day for 7 ol, the average fecal excretion was 1.8 i 0.4% of the total dose, and
when smaller amounts of sodium were ingested (50 mmoI/d), an average of 6.0 i 1.0%
was excreted in the feces (2).

Salt loading a|one increases intestinal calcium absorption. In hypoparathyroid patients,
dietary salt increased intestinal calcium absorption in one study by Meyer (558) but not
in another study by Breslau (559). In Breslau’s study, calcium absorption correlated with
serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. Thus, conclusions about the role of PTH in the increase
in intestinal calcium absorption after a sodium load are speculative.

Studies in premenopausal women suggest that increased intestinal calcium absorption,
rather than increased bone resorption, compensates for sodium-induoed hypercaloiuria
in subjects whose adaptive processes related to bone metabolism are intact (560, 561).
Ginty et al (560) examined the effects of 7 days of high or low dietary sodium

on bone markers in young women. Although urinary calcium was increased with high
(180 mmoI/d) sodium intakes, the effect of high sodium on markers of bone resorption
was not different from the effect of low (80 mmoI/d) sodium intakes. Lietz et al (561) also
found no effect of intakes of 170 mmoI/d or 60 mmoI/d of sodium for 8 days on bone
resorption markers in postmenopausal women. However, Evans et al (547) reported that
postmenopausal women ingesting 300 mmol sodium per day for 7 days had greater
excretion of bone resorption markers than those ingesting 50 mmol sodium per day.

"
"65","These differences were not observed in a premenopausal group (547). These results
suggest that bone resorption is increased in situations where the adaptive responses
of bone are limited or altered, as they are after menopause. It might also suggest that
at levels above 200 mmol sodium intake per day, the regulatory processes are different.
Data from human and animal studies suggest that high dietary sodium Chloride leads
to bone loss due to increased bone resorption (562-568), and even that restriction of
dietary sodium will reduce bone resorption (569). In a review of the interactions between
dietary salt, calcium, and bone, Massey and Whiting (567) suggested that habitual
excessive salt intake contributes to bone loss. Other reviewers have come to the
conclusion that increased dietary sodium Chloride intake negatively affects aoid-base
balance, with subsequent loss of calcium (570, 571).

Massey and Whiting (567) found that the effect of excessive salt intake on bone loss

is modulated in specific subpopulations. For example, people who tend to form renal
calcium stones are more responsive to Changes in dietary salt than are non-stone
formers. Although sodium intakes of stone formers are typically similar to those

of controls (572, 573), the detrimental effects of high sodium intakes on renal stone
risk have been well documented (562, 568, 571). Increasing sodium intake from

50 mmol/d to 300 mmol/d increased renal stone risk by elevating urinary saturation

of calcium phosphate and monosodium urate, and reducing inhibition of calcium
oxalate crystallization (574).

Work by Goulding (545, 546) and Matkovic (575) has generated interest in the effect

of dietary sodium on bone mass. High levels of dietary sodium are not only major
predictors of urinary calcium and hydroxyproline excretion, but are also associated
with greater loss of bone with age, unless dietary calcium is supplemented (576).

Work by Dr Heer’s group has also documented the resorptive response to high dietary
sodium, and the role of aoid-base balance in this process (577).

Dietary sodium also seems to exacerbate the oaloiurio responses to musculoskeletal
unloading in weightlessness (Figure 37). Bed rest subjects consuming a low-sodium
diet (100 mmol/d) had no Change in urinary calcium, while those on a high-sodium

diet (190 mmol/d) had hyperoaloiuria (578). A more recent bed rest study by Heer et

al documented that the high-sodium-induoed increase in bone resorption exceeded
the bed rest-induoed increase, through a mechanism mediated by aoid-base balance
(577, 579, 580). One mechanism could be that metabolic acidosis causes an increase
in urinary oortioosterone (581). Increased sodium intake and consequent low-grade
metabolic acidosis caused an increase in bioaotive gluoooortiooids (540, 582).

In turn, the increase in gluoooortiooid concentration caused rapid bone loss (583-586).
Applying an alkaline salt together with high sodium intake (582) reduced bioaotive
gluoooortiooid excretion, which result supports the idea that aoid-base balance plays
a role in the effects of high sodium intake. A symposium was held recently in Germany
(its proceedings were published in 2008) regarding the impact of aoid-base balance

on health issues (282), including the role of sodium in bone loss (587-589).

High sodium intakes during space flight can exacerbate bone loss and lead to increased
risk of renal stone formation. In and of itself, excess sodium can lead to hypernatremia,
hypertension, and even death. Although it has not been a concern to date, too little
dietary sodium or a deficiency of this electrolyte during flight could lead to hyponatremia,
hypotension, and even death.

"
"66","High Eadiur'n Intake and Bane Lass '
Skin: Skin:
GIMQW Elrumﬁlnglmrw
m m
1!!
“I: 5- ,r
._ FF: 45%
Endium 4'-
Datenblast
Hung Iﬂhlb‘lhun
lass ﬂstenclast
activatinn
Figure 37. Proposed mechanism of the effects of high dietary sodium on bone loss.
Further research is required to investigate potential effects of high sodium intake during
space flight, as the space food system currently has very high sodium levels. The impact
of high sodium intake on bone, calcium, and pH is not well understood, and adjustments
in sodium intake may serve as a viable countermeasure to bone loss. Furthermore,
the role of a high-sodium diet in potassium homeostasis is not well understood.
This may prove to be an area where nutrition and cardiovascular effects of space flight
may interact, and study of the interaction may produce a dietary countermeasure.
Potassium
As the most plentiful intracellular cation, potassium has a significant role in several
physiological processes (525). It is crucial to regulation of acid-base balance, energy
metabolism, blood pressure, membrane transport, and distribution of fluid within the
body. It is also involved in the transmission of nerve impulses and cardiac function (590).
Potassium metabolism that is disordered because of excessive or deficient Circulating
levels has negative consequences for cardiac, muscle, and neurological function.
Deficiency of potassium leads to hypokalemia, muscle weakness, constipation, and
fatigue, or even death. No evidence of adverse effects is associated with toxicity of
potassium from naturally occurring sources. However, supplemental intake may cause
hyperkalemia (and associated weakness, cardiac arrest, and paralysis), metabolic
acidosis (282), decreased neuromuscular function, or even death.
Serum and urinary levels of potassium were both decreased after space flight in
Apollo crewmembers (591), and evidence exists that a similar decrease occurred
in Skylab crewmembers (29).

"
"67","Loss of both total body potassium and exchangeable potassium was observed in
Apollo crewmembers (591). Increased levels of urinary potassium during space flight
may be related to muscle disuse atrophy and inadequate intake (535). In the initial days
of bed rest, excess dietary sodium was shown to be potassium-depleting (Heer et al,
unpublished observations). Loss of lean body mass, along with high sodium intake,

may also result in potassium depletion.

The relationship between bone health and the protein:potassium ratio in the diet

needs to be further investigated, along with the role of potassium in cardiovascular
health during flight.

Fluid

Adequate fluid intake is necessary to maintain the body’s normal hemodynamic state
and normal fluid osmolality, which are important for cardiovascular health and for
maintenance of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. Water is a structural component of
the body and the solvent for transportation of nutrients and waste. Fluid and electrolytes
may be lost from the body by a variety of routes and for a variety of reasons. They are
excreted in sweat, urine, and feces, and in abnormal situations excessive amounts

can be lost by these routes and others. Significant losses may occur through the
gastrointestinal tract as a result of diarrhea, vomiting, or gastric drainage. Loss through
the skin increases with fever, increased metabolism, sweating, and burns (523).

Total body water makes up about 50% to 70% of body mass (592). Fluid requirements
increase with metabolic rate and heat stress. Death from dehydration can occur within
weeks of depriving the body of all water (593).

Fluid and electrolyte homeostasis is significantly altered during space flight, and this
has been extensively reviewed (19, 30, 531, 594-600). The hypothesis originally
proposed to explain this was that upon entering weightlessness, the human body

would experience a headward shift of fluids, with subsequent diuresis and dehydration.
A series of flight experiments was conducted to assess fluid and electrolyte homeostasis
during space flight; the most comprehensive of these took place on the 2 Spacelab Life
Sciences missions in the early 1990s. Despite much research, the hypothesis of diuresis
and subsequent dehydration secondary to the headward fluid shifts has never been
confirmed during actual space flight (19, 531, 533, 534, 599, 601).

Within hours of the onset of weightlessness (the earliest available data point), a reduction
in both plasma volume and extracellular fluid volume had occurred, accompanied by
the “puffy” faces typically observed early in flight (19, 602). Initially, the decrement in
plasma volume (~17%) was larger than the decrement in extracellular fluid volume
(~10%), suggesting that interstitial fluid volume (the other four—fifths of extracellular

fluid) is conserved proportionally more than plasma volume (19). The idea that interstitial
fluid volume is conserved is supported by rapid decreases in total circulating protein,
specifically albumin (19), indicating that protein, and associated onootio pressure, shifted
from the intravascular to the extravascular space. This would have facilitated the initial
Changes in plasma volume (19).

Following the initial adaptation, extracellular fluid volume further decreased between

the first days of flight and 8 to 12 days after launch, from the initial ~10% below preflight
levels to ~15% below preflight levels (19). Plasma volume was partially restored during
this period, from the initial ~17% below preflight levels to ~11% below preflight levels
(19), and it has been found to remain 10% to 15% below preflight levels even for
extended-duration flights (603).

"
"68","Leach et al (19) and Norsk et al (534) have hypothesized that the shift of protein and fluid
to the extravascular space represents an adaptation to weightlessness, and that after
several days, some of the extravascular albumin has been metabolized, with a loss of
oncotic force and a resulting decreased extracellular fluid volume and increased plasma
volume. This loss of extracellular protein (intra- and extravascular) and the associated
decreased oncotic potential probably play a role in postflight orthostatio intolerance,
which has been considered to result partly from reduced plasma volume at landing
(604). Furthermore, the loss of protein may in part explain why fluid loading alone does
not restore Circulatory volume (605, 606), as no additional solute load exists to maintain
the fluid volume. Another potential (or perhaps partial) explanation for the failure of

fluid loading is that because astronauts’ diets are high in sodium, additional sa|t cannot
help increase plasma volume or extracellular fluid volume. This explanation has been
documented in bed rest (537).

The effect of space flight on total body water has been evaluated to assess hydration.
Shuttle anol Skylab astronauts had decreases of about 1% in total body water during
flight (19, 607, 608), and the percentage of body mass represented by water did not
Change. Thus, the often-proposed weightlessness-induoed dehydration does not exist.
This has also been shown by European investigators on Shuttle anol Mir missions
(534,536,599,601,609)

Diuresis is also typically not observed during flight (59, 531, 534, 536, 594, 601,
610-612), for a number of possible reasons. Operational constraints have made it
difficult to document urine volume accurately on the first day of space flight. However,
on the Spaoelab Life Sciences missions, urine volume on the first 3 days of flight was
significantly less than preflight volume, and urine volume tended to be less than preflight
volume throughout the flight (19). Urine volumes on a week-Iong flight to Mir were also
less than preflight volumes (611). During the first week of the 59- and 84-day Skylab
flights (29), urine volume was less than it was before flight, and for the remainder of the
missions it was unchanged from preflight levels. Decreased fluid intake likely accounts
for the decreased urine volume, which was accompanied by little or no change in total
body water. Adequate urine volume during flight is important for reducing the risk of
renal stone formation (298, 299, 613, 614).

As mentioned above, the percentage of body mass represented by total body water

is relatively unchanged during flight (19). However, on a volume basis, the Change in
extracellular fluid volume was found to be greater than the Change (or lack of Change)

in total body water (19). Thus, by difference, intracellular fluid volume increased during
space flight. This had been previously hypothesized from ground-based studies (615)
and observed in postflight studies of Apollo orewmembers (59). The mechanism for

a space flight-induced increase in intracellular fluid volume is unknown. One possible
explanation is that a shift in fuel utilization results in increased glycogen storage,

a condition known to increase cellular water content.

Diuresis has been documented to occur in bed rest studies (616-618). Urinary albumin,
a marker of kidney function, has been shown to be reduced in both space flight (relative
to before flight) and bed rest (relative to the ambulatory state) (157-159). However, space
flight, but not bed rest, results in reduced urine flow rates (601). Taken together, these
data suggest that differences in fluid metabolism exist between analog studies and
actual space flight (533, 534, 599, 601, 609, 612, 618). Such differences do not seem to
be a simple effect of abnormal renal function, and thus require further investigation (619).
Although no space flight-induoed dehydration occurs, care must be taken to ensure
adequate fluid intake and hydration status. Inadequate fluid intake increases the risk

"
"69","of dehydration and renal stone formation. Fluid intake during flight is typically less than
preflight intake, and often below the recommended quantity. In Closed flight vehicles,
water is often a limiting resource, but rationing of water should be avoided.
Deficiency of fluid leads to dehydration and ultimately death. Likewise, an excess of
fluid intake leads to water intoxication and ultimately death. Obviously, the risk of this
occurring during space flight, where water is a limited commodity, is extremely low.
Decreased fluid intake during space flight may be a consequence of reduced thirst
during flight (86), but the reason for reduced thirst is unknown.
Studies described above have documented that total body water is unchanged
during flight, but apparently a shift of fluid from the extracellular to the intracellular
compartment occurs. The effect of this shift on cell size and cell function (such as
the effect of a change in the density of receptors on cell membranes) has not been
evaluated. A change in cell size and function might be responsible for some of
the microgravity-induced changes noted in other systems (such as the endocrine,
cardiovascular, and immune systems).
Renal Stone Risk
A renal stone risk profile is determined from measured urinary oxalate, uric acid,
Citrate, calcium, sodium, magnesium, sulfate, potassium, pH, phosphorus, and
total volume, and calculated supersaturation of calcium oxalate, brushite (calcium
phosphate), sodium urate, uric acid, and struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate).
Generally, renal stone risk is elevated during space flight (299). As with any space flight
effect, some crewmembers are more affected than others. Figure 38 is an important
illustration of this. Some crewmembers had very high elevations in brushite or calcium
oxalate supersaturation during space flight, whereas others had very low levels of
supersaturation. During space flight, environmental and dietary factors a|| greatly affect
renal stone risk. Crewmembers who have an increased risk before space flight and
then are exposed to microgravity with concomitant bone loss, hypercalciuria, increased
urinary sodium, and decreased urinary output may have a further increased risk of renal
stone formation during space flight.
Brushite Supersaturatiun ISaltﬁlum Dxalata Supersaturatiun
E
I
III I I
E l : ' I III
I i
II- .. i 'I I
4 . i I i : l I I I I E I
I I. i
2 :__ I _'__i__'______ J__r, E 1-. - -i - i - II- T n.
. = I i I i ' I
I1 "" q. I ll I
##4## $mﬁaﬁ$ #fa""? “F#Pﬁ
.J"" M- £3 {5"" ﬁﬁﬁﬂh ‘E‘T ‘2'- {g‘ Mb N..- 42° {3"" ?@ZQH ﬁﬂh '1' Q,
Figure 38. Estimated supersaturation risk from the Renal Stone Risk Profile during space
flight on [88. Each symbol represents a 24-h urine pool, and the solid black line represents
the group mean. The red dashed line is the point above Which the risk is greater than in the
non-stone forming population.

"
"70","As of 2013, 25 renal stone events have been reported among 19 crewmembers with
the majority of these stone events occurring post flight (Robert Pietrzyk, personal
communication). To minimize the risk of stone formation, potassium citrate (KCit)

has been successfully tested during ISS missions (433), and has been “transitioned

to operations.” This means that KCit is part of the flight surgeon’s toolbox for mitigating
the renal stone risk of crewmembers and is available on the ISS for use at flight surgeon
discretion if clinically indicated. The use of KCit was shown to increase the urinary pH,
increasing the solubility of uric acid and thereby decreasing the risk of uric acid stone
formation. The dosage of KCit must

be carefully prescribed so as not to =

. . . .E 12

Increase the nsk of brushIte stone -- '

development due to elevated urinary E 111 ""_ l -

pH. However, given that fluid intake E """" I ' "" _

for maintenance of hydration is a 3 'ﬁhw 4""

a preferred countermeasure, and a E _ l . 3'31! 'h ""

some residual concerns exist about 3 .1; ' ' . _ '1. i 1,
potassium supplementation side E 4 '- "" l1. ‘iﬁ-Iﬂ ; 'l- .
effects, it was decided not 2 2 '3 '_:~. "" ' ”r': . r- _ h, J__.
to routinely provide KCit g :1 ' ' ' 'T H} _ k ""I n-

to crewmembers. E n - '- - - - - ‘- '

. . ﬂ sun 111m 1511!] EWI
MagneSIum and Citrate are both Eitratn. Urine mgfday
conSIdered protective when It comes
t9 caICIum-Contalnlng renal stone Figure 39. Relationship between urinary citrate
”Sk' However, they do ”Qt mInImIze and sodium urate supersaturation. The dashed
risk for all forms 0f kidney stones; line at 2 represents the average risk of sodium
specifically, these urinary stone urate stone formation for the general population,
inhibitors do not reduce the risk With numbers above 2 being higher—than-average
of sodium urate kidney stones. risk. Citrate, which typically protects against renal
Thus, taking KCit or KMgCit should stone risk, is actually posittve/y correlated with
not be perceived as a panacea sodium urate supersaturation (Pearson r .= 0.065;
for stone risk. In fact, in our data, P <0.016). .The red dashed line IS the pomt above

. . . which the risk IS greater than In the non-stone-
S.Od'Hm urate supersaturatlon _'S forming population. Data are from 1399 twenty-
SIgnIfIcantly correlated WIth unnary four—hour urine collections.
citrate excretion (Figure 39).

a
@531.
I .
_ I Ir '
. _ ,
I ' ' ""
Liquid salt and pepper dispensers floating on Space Shuttle Columbia’s middeck during STS-94.

"
"71","' Space Fllght Ophthalmlc

' Changes and Nutrition
Ophthalmic health among astronauts has gotten attention in recent years because
of a newly identified issue for some crewmembers. In addition to a general increase
in cataract risk (620-622), some crewmembers have experienced vision-related
changes after Iong-duration space flight. These Changes include optic disc edema,
globe flattening, hyperopic shifts, choroidal folds, and cotton wool spots (623).
The etiology of the refractive and structural ophthalmic Changes is currently not known
and continues to be researched, but biochemical evidence indicates that the folate- and
vitamin B12-dependent 1-Carbon transfer pathway may be involved. Nutrition is known
to be an important factor for ophthalmic health in general. This section will review the
available literature on this topic and general nutrition in ophthalmic health, along with
ongoing research to understand and counteract these effects of space flight.
Ophthalmic Changes
Mader and colleagues first described 7 cases among Iong-duration crewmembers on
ISS who had evidence of ophthalmic changes after flight, including optic disc edema,
globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts (623). Since then, additional cases
have been identified, with the prevalence approaching 20% to 30% of crewmembers.
Myasnikov and Stepanova reported evidence of postflight edema of the optic nerve
discs among Russian cosmonauts and 1 case (out of 10) with signs of intracranial
hypertension, although they note the measurements were made before and after
(not during) flight (624). The mechanism of the ophthalmic Changes is not known,
but microgravity-induced fluid shifts (2, 531), elevated cabin 002 exposure, possible
intraocular pressure or intracranial pressure Changes, and local intraorbital (choridal
and optic nerve sheath) Changes have been suggested as possible contributing factors.
It is not clear why some crewmembers on some missions may experience these
issues and others on the same mission, exposed to the same environment, do not.
Recent biochemical evidence that the folate- and vitamin B12-dependent 1-carbon
transfer pathway may be involved could help explain individual susceptibility to
these ocular Changes.
One-Carbon Metabolism
One-carbon metabolism refers to a pathway that requires folate, vitamin B12, and
vitamin Ba, and is involved in purine and pyrimidine synthesis, amino acid metabolism,
and synthesis of the methylating agent S-adenosylmethionine (SAM, Figure 40).
Alterations in this pathway can lead to buildup of certain intermediates, including
homocysteine. Factors such as genetic polymorphisms, pharmacological agents,
and dietary intake and status of folate, vitamin Ba, and vitamin B12 can influence
plasma homocysteine concentration (625, 626).
Much of the homocysteine literature has focused on its association with coronary artery
disease, stroke, and migraines (625, 627, 628), but some studies show associations

"
"72","of homocysteine with ophthalmic health issues. Issues such as age-related macular
degeneration result from lipid deposits under the retinal pigment epithelium (629)
and decreased retinal vessel functionality (630), and some theorize that age-related
macular degeneration is similar to the development of cardiovascular disease (631).
Because homocysteine is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, many have looked at
relationships between homocysteine, or other metabolites and vitamins in the 1-Carbon
metabolism pathway, and ophthalmic health issues such as age-related macular
degeneration, dry eye, glaucoma, and optic neuropathy (632-635). For instance, a
meta-analysis showed that elevated plasma homocysteine was associated with an
increased risk of primary open-angle glaucoma (636). Other meta-analyses have shown
that increased serum homocysteine and low vitamin B12 status were independently
associated with increased risk for age-related macular degeneration (634, 637).
Daily supplementation with folate, vitamin BB, and vitamin B12 is associated with
a 30% to 40% decreased risk for age-related macular degeneration (638).
Meliwlalud Attuplur
acceptur mm. BAH
::;:;t;.t.:::.:... \
HC‘I"" m _
SAM 55—” EYE“ 55—. ‘1 KBT AA, FA
k y E—MTHF l /
Methiunine (”K
PRP-CDA —F2MCA
Dietary:I pmlein MuscleJJ'ﬂr “mm
:atahnliﬁm 3 ,r-‘I'THF > ﬂiaﬁn I
D. t H [“53 swine \‘ 5,1D-MTHF D-MM-CDA _. MMA
||'-_"" aw UH |'-_""
lecine I

L-MM-CUA

suc-cm
Figure 40. Overview of 1-carbon metabolism. AA, amino acids; CBS, cystathionine B-synthase;
CYS, cystathionine; FA, fatty acids; HCY, homocysteine; aKBij a—ketobutyrate; MCA, methy/citric
acid; MM—COA, methy/ma/ony/ coenzyme A (CoA); MMA, methylma/onic acid; MS, methionine
synthase; 5-MTHF, 5-methy/tetrahydrofo/ate; 5,10-MTHF, 5,10-methy/enetetrahydrofo/ate;
MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofo/ate reductase; MTRR, 5-methy/tetrahydrofo/ate homocysteine
methy/transferase reductase; PRP-COA, propiony/ CoA; SAH, S-adenosy/homocysteine; SAM,
S—adenosy/methionine; SUC-CoA, succinyl CoA; THF, tetrahydrofo/ate

"
"73","'d—T‘E-
. ""1-.
. I - I H ‘1'—
ikﬁ' _._. I :i
. - I "" - . -.
i ﬁfai.“
Figure 41. Artistic depiction of vision issues related to space flight, and the potential involvement
of genetic influences in this problem. The depiction of a different DNA base pair (blue above and
red below) in the 2 strands reflects genetic polymorphisms, or multiple forms, of the DNA. Inset
imagery includes [88 and a Hubble Space Telescope image of the Cat’s Eye Nebula, to reflect
that these issues are relevant not only for [88 missions, but exploration-C/ass missions as well.
Folate
Folate is the general term used to describe the vitamin folic acid and compounds that
have activity similar to that of folic acid (639). Folic acid is the form of the vitamin used
in vitamin supplements and fortified food products, but it is rarely found to occur
naturally in food.
The reduction of folic acid and dihydrofolate by a cytosolic enzyme produces the
active form of folate, tetrahydrofolate (T HF). Tetrahydrofolate accepts single-carbon
groups from reactions in amino acid metabolism to form active derivatives of THF
(639). These derivatives function in amino acid metabolism, specifically in the reversible
reactions of serine synthesis from glycine, methionine synthesis from homocysteine, and
histidine metabolism. Folate is essential in cell division because the THF derivatives play
important roles in purine and pyrimidine synthesis. Tetrahydrofolate derivatives play
a major role in the formation of thymidylate, which is a substrate needed for
DNA synthesis (639).
Deficiency of folate leads to megaloblastic anemia. Low folate intake will cause red
blood cell folate concentrations to diminish within 4 months. Bone marrow cells become
megaloblastic (that is, they take on a nucleated, embryonic form), and anemia occurs
after 4 to 5 months of low folate intake (640). Folate deficiency in humans has been
described as a 4-stage process (641, 642), including Changes in serum folate (Stage ‘I),

"
"74","Changes in red blood cell folate (Stage 2), defective DNA synthesis and elevated
homocysteine (Stage 3), and Clinical folate deficiency (Stage 4), manifested by
macroovalocytosis (many large, oval cells in the blood), elevated mean corpuscular
(red blood cell) volume, and large, nucleated embryonic cells.
Early space flight data showed a reduction in red blood cell folate after Iong-duration
missions (4, 6). Serum folate is variable among crewmembers, but generally does not
Change during flight (Figure 42). Interestingly, serum folate was lower during space flight
in crewmembers with vision-related issues (140).
mu H15""
31mm “""“"""""""""""""" 55""”
.E. E
E Eu: 51m]
hiH ETIH | i
E mu E El]
3 """""""""""""""""""" E
n: 11:: $- 2
n I]
ﬁt 4’3) +3 £4 ﬁg 4""” J‘ﬁﬁeﬁ'ﬂﬁﬁaﬁﬁ +3?""
Figure 42. Red blood cell (RBC) (left) and serum folate (right) before, during, and after long-
duration space flight (data are mean i SD). Note: RBC folate data are not available during flight
because of sample processing requirements.
As with many nutrients, folate deficiency on an exploration mission could be
catastrophic. Animal studies have shown that low folate status increases Chromosome
damage resulting from radiation exposure (643-646); however, it should be noted that
excessive folate supplementation provided no additional benefit (643). Similarly, cell
models have shown that folio acid deficiency increases sensitivity to Chromosome
breakage from ionizing radiation (645). Antioxidant properties of folate have been
studied, and folate was found to scavenge a diverse array of reactive oxygen species
efficiently (647). Cell models also show the ability of folate to reduce iron toxicity in
cases of iron overload, by oxidizing free or chelated iron (647). Evidence exists that
in subjects living in saturation diving conditions with increased partial pressure of
oxygen for 10 to 14 days, folate status decreases, which may be related to its
antioxidant properties (481). Folate status may be even more important during
exploration missions than on ISS because of known increases in iron storage
during Iong-duration space flight (6) and exposure to ionizing radiation.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12 functions in many enzymatic reactions, and deficiencies result in anemia, as
well as neurological disorders. Vitamin B12 works as a cofactor for 3 different enzymatic
reactions: (1) the conversion of homocysteine to methionine, (2) the conversion
of L-methyImannyI-Coenzyme A (CoA) to suooinyI-CoA, and (3) the isomerization of
L-Ieuoine anol B-Ieuoine. Vitamin B12 deficiency may cause the accumulation of folate
in the serum because of a reduction in B12-dependent methyItransferase, also known
as the methyI-folate trap (648). Vitamin B12 also functions in the synthesis of Choline,
which can be converted to the neurotransmitter aoetyloholine.

"
"75","Unlike other water-squbIe vitamins, vitamin B12 can be stored in the body for years.

It is stored predominantly in the liver, but smaller amounts can be found in the muscles,
kidneys, bones, heart, brain, and spleen. About 2 to 5 mg of vitamin B12 is stored in the
body (649). The size of B12 stores remains relatively stable, partly because urinary and
fecal excretion decrease in direct relationship to decreases in the body pools. The half-
Iife of vitamin B12 in humans is 350 to 400 days (649).

No evidence of toxicity has been found with vitamin B12 supplementation in amounts
greater than the RDA (649), and no adverse effects are reported to be caused by an
excess of vitamin B12. If a person went for many years without adequate intake and/or
supplementation, body stores could be depleted. Other factors that could contribute

to a vitamin B12 deficiency include a decrease in gastric acidity, the presence of atrophio
gastritis, and uncontrolled growth of bacteria accompanied by malabsorption of food-
bound B12 (650). Deficiency of vitamin B12 leads to pernicious anemia and demyelination
of the central nervous system, and can lead to death (651).

Methylmalonio acid is generally unchanged during space flight, suggesting that vitamin
B12 deficiency is not a significant issue during flight. However, blood concentrations of
methylmalonio acid were shown to be higher in orewmembers who experienced vision-
reIated issues after flight than in those who did not have such issues (140), and this
difference was evident before, during, and after space flight. Several studies support

the notion that perturbations in the vitamin B12 metabolic pathway can cause ophthalmic
health issues such as optic neuropathy and age-related macular degeneration (632-634).
Biotin

Biotin is a required cofactor for pyruvate oarboxylase, aoetyI-CoA oarboxylase isoforms
1 and 2, propionyI-CoA oarboxylase, anol B-methylorotonyI-CoA oarboxylase (652).

The 5 biotin-dependent enzymes are involved in carbohydrate, fatty acid, and amino
acid metabolism (652), and the primary role of biotin is to transfer 002 units from one
compound to another. Biotin exists in a free state or bound to proteins. About 81% of
biotin in the human body is free biotin in serum, and 10% is free in tissues (653).

Despite the observation that frank signs of deficiency are rare, there is growing
appreciation of genetic, physiologic, anol pharmacologio conditions that marginally impair
biotin status (654-656). This suggests that the lack of physiologic manifestations of biotin
deficiency may not be a reliable measure to gauge biotin status. Marginal changes in
biotin status have been shown to affect a range of metabolic factors, from oarboxylase
activity to the expression of non-biotin-dependent enzymes such as gluookinase,
ornithine transoarbamylase, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (657-659).

Biotin status has never been measured during or after long-duration space flight, but

it is unlikely there are any frank biotin deficiencies, which would present as neurological
and dermatological manifestations.

Vitamin A

Another important vitamin involved in vision health is vitamin A. Vitamin A is a general
term that refers to a family of fat-squbIe compounds that are structurally similar to
retinoI and share its biological activity. Among these are retinoI, o-Carotene, B-Carotene,
anol retinyI palmitate. Vitamin A or oarotenoids can be found in dark green leafy
vegetables and in vegetables and fruits that are yellow, orange, or red. Vitamin A plays

a fundamental role in the retinal response to light. Inadequate vitamin A can result in
night blindness, delayed light and dark adaptation, and dry eye (660).

"
"76","Beyond its essential role in the visual process, vitamin A is directly involved in gene
expression, reproduction, embryonic development, and immunity. Vitamin A and
B-Carotene serve as biological antioxidants and have been shown in multiple studies to
reduce the risk of cancer and coronary heart disease (661, 662). Vitamin A also plays a
role, albeit sometimes indirectly, in the function of almost all of the body’s organs (663).
Oxidative stress is increased during space flight, and this could affect cardiovascular
health and cancer risk, as described in other sections of this book. Vitamin A status may
play a critical role in maintaining antioxidant health during space flight; however, as with
many antioxidants, the desire to supplement with high doses in the hope of staving off
one disease is high, but unwarranted and potentially counterproductive. Excess vitamin
A, in levels on the order of twice the recommended daily intake, has been shown to
increase bone resorption and fracture risk (271, 664-666). Furthermore, supplementation
with B-Carotene should be done with caution (either alone or with vitamin A or in
combination with vitamin E), because of unanticipated outcomes of an increased risk of
lung cancer in smokers (667, 668). This increased risk among smokers might be related
to pro-oxidant actions of B-oarotene in the lung.
When considering pre- and postflight space flight data, there is a significant interaction
between the effects of landing site and space flight on serum levels of both retinol
anol retinol-binding protein (6). Russian landings are different from US landings in that
blood samples are usually collected several hours later because of the logistics of
the landing site.
Serum retinol decreased from 0.73 i 0.17 pg/mL to 0.59 i 0.13 pg/mL when landings
were in Russia, and increased from 0.52 i 0.09 pg/mL to 0.63 i 0.12 pg/mL when
landings were in the US. Similarly, retinol-binding protein decreased from 61.4 i 5.6 to
50.92 i 8.41 mg/L when landings were in Russia, and increased from 49.2 i 9.2 to
53.0 i 8.7 mg/L when landings were in the US. These differences in landing sites could
be related to the time delay in sample collection, the fact that crewmembers might have
consumed food during the time delay, or even a difference in the stress response at
different sites. These data, however, do not provide evidence that there is a deficiency
of any sort for vitamin A.
ln-flight vitamin A data have been collected as part of Nutrition experiments on ISS,
and Figure 43 shows that no significant changes in retinol or B-Carotene occur during
space flight.
1‘"" m5
0.?
Mal:
-I _I
a m W‘H‘ﬂ E
=L m
-------------------I =DIEE
IL:
l1."" man
i: la 1: ,5: 1:: Ih 1:-
J? J"" '3 @ﬂ ﬁﬂﬁd‘ﬁd‘ﬁ 11‘ 4:5? J? ""f ”h 1‘? qﬂﬂﬂﬂaﬁ q???
Figure 43. Serum retino/ (left) and B-Carotene (right) before, during, and after long-duration space
flight. Dashed lines represent normal range. Data are mean i SD.

"
"77",":>
In addition to the vision-related Changes observed in some astronauts after long-
duration space flight, several studies have confirmed that astronauts and cosmonauts
have an increased risk of cataract formation after space flight (621, 622, 669, 670).
Cucinotta et al (622) identified an increased risk of all types of cataracts (including
posterior subcapsular, cortical, and nuclear) among astronauts with greater exposure
to radiation. Longitudinal follow-up studies have been conducted and it was determined
that progression of cortical cataracts, but not posterior subcapsular or nuclear cataracts,
is related to space radiation exposure (620, 621). Although radiation exposure is a
large driving force for the oxidative damage that leads to some types of cataracts, the
longitudinal study provided evidence that intake of specific nutrients may provide some
protective effects (621). In the first report of the NASA Study of Cataract in Astronauts,
nutritional intake estimates were obtained from a questionnaire, and the data provided
evidence that B-Carotene and lycopene intake had a protective effect for some types
of cataracts in astronauts (621). As reviewed by Agte and Tarwadi, numerous ground-
based studies have provided evidence for associations between micronutrients and
antioxidants (either blood levels or estimated intakes) and cataracts (671). A recent
meta—analysis provided similar results supporting an inverse association of 0-Carotene
(and vitamin E, lutein, and zeaxanthin) with age-related cataract (672).
Although epidemiological data support the idea that lower vitamin A status is associated
with cataract incidence, it is not known whether altered micronutrient and antioxidant
intake during space flight could minimize cataract incidence related to space radiation,
as this requires further interventional study and better estimates of in-flight nutrient
intake along with nutrient status assessments.
Expedition 35 Flight Engineers Chris Cassidy (pictured) and Tom Marshburn (out of frame)
inspect and replace a pump controller box on the International Space Station.
Lit""
. . . .. i . x
- _ . ' 1. .
- . - -. -- r..-
- lib. __ Iii"":-
g}? ._I' I
J“- ‘ FE!"" __I p ""3'"" .l_—_ l: 1-
‘..- - . .1 _.ﬂ"" ‘ I._-:':.""
§ “I intﬁ 5"""" I _
_ .;- r. “ r
. '1; .
' i- 4'3"""":
_.H:
F'. '
. ,3
r- I
I 1- .-.- . ?.-

"
"78","7O
._-_ 35:3 . I L - -
- ~ i: t .' ., . .. H
-='_.'__L'- -—I.:‘_""'--_.I- . -—_I__-_--‘—._! a ‘4 I. .I I . I I
w. . V. «a
__ - . _..-.—. . '-. ""-.l . __r .I'.I ._-
. ""'I'II ‘ .‘I :‘J
I i. . ""L"". '- ‘1
.II‘ 15‘le k I
- _ -.-_ :1. 1"" . . h I 1. i.
(I ii - I w
. q. .
‘L-ai E * -. - .
E - - w .m
II - II'- I .r i'II I - F'- .
- - 3 II _I '5... 'l; . 1.
F I' II I if! E
L. I I -I I'l— - _:'—' I I r'
-.-"" | i'. --__ _, I Fan“... .| I. r
-. . .' _ E II ""- E 'I- I
_. .lr ' I ' -r___.-""'II __ rF. r I
- III ”I .1 {I’m II III I. I III
.11} . . '
I If,- .1 ‘—
-II J ' _ :f'l- __ .. I
|- - .3! P -7 ,_
I _ - _ . : \K;
_ -- _ 1‘. _
.I I 1""- . I I
.- - 1 4 __ . _ _ ""l— _
II_ I -' I i . - -II '{II . _I,IF'—' -
' a I' r.ﬁ*_ _
r - ___..,,-'-.. -
I 1i iIII II. ""'II '--_I ——- I .-
. I—""
--— .'. A Mr
' f .—.
, ' I. r 1
-I.- - . .£ I
_ _ '“III q,___ -I ‘ In the International Space Station's Harmony
node, European Space Agency astronaut
_ w . _ Alexander Gerst, Expedition 40 flight
Hit? _ 3-. engineer, performs an eye exam for the
EF . :.f_ 'I __ Ocular Health experiment, Which observes
_ - H -. a ' and seeks to understand vision changes
‘ '1'» during long-term space missions.

"
"79","0 Immune Function,
Inflammation, and Nutrition
Optimal function of the immune system is impaired in the presence of malnutrition.
Without adequate nutrition, the immune system is clearly deprived of the components
needed to generate an effective immune response (673, 674). Nutrients act as
antioxidants and as oofaotors (675). Historically, during space flight crews generally
have lower dietary intake than they do under normal conditions on the ground (2).
It is well known from ground research that a lack of macronutrients or selected
micronutrients, like zinc, selenium, and the antioxidant vitamins, can have profound
effects on immune function (676-679). Such a lack of nutrients also leads to deregulation
of the balanced host response (680). Disruption of nutritional balance and dietary intake
of astronauts and cosmonauts during space flight, which is often accompanied by a
stress response, might influence their immune response (681, 682). However, detailed
information on the effects of many micronutrients during space flight are mandatory
before specific nutritional recommendations can be made, especially with respect
to their relationship with immune system function.
Energy Intake
As discussed earlier, some crewmembers have an insufficient energy intake, which
can lead to more extensive free radical propagation because of diminished protein-
based antioxidant defense mechanisms (2, 683). On the Mir station and the Life and
Microgravity Science Shuttle mission, space travelers who consumed inadequate energy
intake had significant increases in urinary excretion of 8-iso-prostaglandin-F2c1 and
8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2 deoxyguanosine (8-OH-dG), markers for oxidative damage (684).
Protein and Amino Acids
Stein et al suggest that space flight triggers a stress response similar to the one
triggered by stress induced by injury (685). Protein and amino acid deficiencies can
have profound effects on a variety of immune system functions (686, 687). With respect
to specific amino acids, arginine is necessary for normal T—oell function and may become
essential in catabolic states. Supplementary dietary arginine has been shown to have
useful effects on cellular immunity in animal studies, showing increased size of the
thymus, enhanced lymphocyte proliferation in response to mitogen anol alloantigen,
augmented macrophage and killer cell lysis, and increased lymphocyte interleukin 2
production and receptor activity (688). Supplementation of arginine led to improved
wound healing and immune responses in elderly subjects (689). Judging by these
observations it might seem promising to supplement arginine during Iong-term missions;
however, up to now no studies have been carried out to test arginine as a measure to
improve immune response during space missions.
Another amino acid beneficial for the immune system is glutamine. Glutamine is the
most abundant free amino acid in the body. It can inhibit NF-KB activation and cytokine
expression after sepsis (690). Some of the beneficial effects of glutamine are its

"
"80","antioxidant effects and its actions as a precursor to glutathione, an energy substrate
for lymphocytes and neutrophils, and as a stimulator of nucleotide synthesis (691, 692).
Glutamine seems to have a significant beneficial effect on mortality, length of hospital
stay, and infectious morbidity in critical illness (691). Positive results of glutamine
supplementation have been shown in critically ill patients, in whom supplemental
glutamine reduced complications and mortality rates in addition to having a stimulating
action on the immune system (693, 694). However, up to now supplementation of
glutamine as a pharmaconutrient has not been tested in space flight or space flight
analogs (eg, bed rest).

Vitamin D

As already described in previous Chapters, the classical function of vitamin D is t

o regulate calcium homeostasis and thus bone formation and resorption. However,
recent publications show that vitamin D also exerts other biological activities including
immunomodulation. The latter seems to be mediated by the (nuclear) vitamin D receptor
(VDR) expressed in antigen-presenting cells and activated T cells (695). Vitamin D and
the VDR are required for the blood to have normal numbers of regulatory T cells.

The discovery that VDR is inducible in lymphocytes suggests a role for 1,25(OH)2D3 in
the immune system (696). Even the enzyme 25(OH)D3-1-o-hydroxy|ase is expressed

by active macrophages, making them able to synthesize and secrete 1,25(OH)2D3 (697).
However, in macrophages the enzyme is mainly activated by immune signals such as
interferon-y rather than by parathyroid hormone, which is the activator in the kidney
(695). Moreover, the active vitamin D metabolite 1,25(OH)2D3 can also be modulated

by alternative mechanisms to increase the ability of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
from sensitized human donors to resist microbes (here myoobaoteria). Martineau et al
found that 1,25(OH)2D3 suppressed both bacillus Calmette-Guérin and Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in infected cell cultures, likely through “nonolassical” mechanisms including
the induction of antimicrobial peptides (698, 699). Kondo et al found that vitamin D
supplementation improved the sensitivity of the treatment response to pegylated
interferon o/ribavirin therapy in Chronic hepatitis C patients (700).

Studies during or after space flight have shown numerous Changes in astronauts’
immune status, including altered distribution of Circulating leukocytes, altered
production of cytokines, decreased activity of natural killer cells, decreased function

of granulocytes, decreased activation of T cells, altered levels of immunoglobulins,
reactivation of latent viruses, altered virus-speoifio immunity, expression of Epstein-
Barr virus immediate early and late genes, and altered neuroendocrine responses (701).
Furthermore, evidence exists that among individuals wintering over in the Antarctic for
6 months, who have high serum cortisol, a higher vitamin D status is related to a lower
probability of viral shedding in saliva (407). In that study an interactive effect occurred
between cortisol and vitamin D, and subjects with lower serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
and with the highest quartile of serum cortisol (22.5 pg/dL or higher) had more evidence
for shedding of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in saliva than did individuals in the lowest
quartile of cortisol (13.1 pg/dL or below, Figure 44). Thus, a low vitamin D status

of astronauts during space missions might have an impact on their immune status.
Further studies are mandatory to distinguish between the effects of vitamin D
deficiency and mere microgravity effects.

"
"81","Figure 44. An interaction . . m 1 ___ Upper quartile ctcortisol
between serum cortisol, \I/Itam/n .3 _D_ LIME“ quartile nicortisal
D status, and the probability of E

EBVshedd/ng. Data from all 41 f, 1 '- .-

participants in the Antarctic study E w

are included in the graph, and the E um ""

data were statistically analyzed a n .

using the continuous data set g .- “'3' n

of cortisol data. The data are ﬂ '

split into the 2 subgroups here '3

for presentation purposes. “- ﬂ'mm a 2a 40 an an “m 120

The graph is from Zwart et a/ (407)' Serum 25-hydruxyvitamin D {nmuitL}

Vitamin B12

Vitamin B12 functions in many enzymatic reactions, and deficiencies result in anemia,
as well as neurological disorders. Vitamin B12 functions as a coenzyme in 2 metabolic
forms: adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin. Vitamin B12 works as a cofactor for

3 different enzymatic reactions: (1) the conversion of homocysteine to methionine,

(2) the conversion of L-methylmalonyI-coenzyme A (CoA) to succinyI-CoA, and (3)

the isomerization of L-Ieucine and B-Ieucine. Vitamin B12 deficiency may cause

the accumulation of folate in the serum because of a reduction in B12-dependent
methyltransferase, also known as the methyI-folate trap (648). Vitamin B12 also
functions in the synthesis of choline, which can be converted to the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine. Vitamin B12 deficiency may lead to alterations of immunological
indicators, such as a reduction of lymphocytes and suppression of natural killer cell
activity, both of which can be reversed by supplementation with vitamin B12 (702).

In one study, for 4 months elderly subjects (aged 70 years) received, in addition to

the regular diet, a special nutritional formula providing, among other nutrients, 120 IU
vitamin E, 3.8 mg vitamin B12, and 400 mg folic acid. NK-cell cytotoxic activity
increased in supplemented subjects, indicating increased innate immunity in elderly
people (703). These few studies demonstrate the importance of a sufficient B vitamin
status to maintain an adequate immune response (704).

Sodium

High sodium intake is correlated with development of hypertension in sodium-sensitive
people. We have shown in space flight as well as in ambulatory conditions on Earth that
at an intake level of about 4000 mg/d, sodium is retained without being accompanied by
fluid retention (30, 537, 705). A hypothesis that might explain how sodium can be bound
in an osmoticaIIy inactive way has been brought forward by Titze et al (543, 706) and
proposes that sodium can be stored on proteoglycans in interstitial sites. This uniquely
bound sodium can induce a state of local hypertonicity in the skin interstitium.

In a further study they suggest that the local hypertonicity is sensed by macrophages,
which then activate a transcription factor (tonicity enhanced binding protein), which

in turn induces vascular endothelial growth factor C signaling (538, 539, 707).
Macrophages play a key role in innate immunity, and therefore further studies in
microgravity should distinguish between the effects of microgravity and high sodium
intake on the immune system.

"
"82","Vitamin A

In brief, vitamin A plays a well-known role in immune function and protection against
infections (708-711). A vitamin A deficiency impairs muoosal barriers and diminishes
the function of neutrophils, macrophages, and NK cells (712); it may affect host defenses
directly (713) or indirectly through its role in epithelial cell differentiation and host barrier
function (710). The considerable immunity benefits of vitamin A, which would contribute
to reducing the risk of various pathogen-mediated diseases, warrant a recommendation
to supplement individuals with minimal or poor vitamin A status. However, whether
immunity benefits accrue from providing additional vitamin A to those with sufficient
status is not known (714).

Vitamin G

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is an essential component of every living cell. The
concentration of vitamin C is very high in leukocytes, and the vitamin is used rapidly
during infection to prevent oxidative damage. Vitamin C is a regulator of redox and
metabolic Checkpoints that control activation and survival of immune cells (680).

A deficiency in vitamin C status is associated with reduced immune function (715).
Vitamin C has been shown to stimulate the immune system by enhancing T-Iymphooyte
proliferation in response to infection, and increasing cytokine production and synthesis
of immunoglobulins (716). However, the antioxidant role during space flight of neither
vitamin A nor vitamin C has been investigated up to now. In analog studies such as
(short- or long-duration) bed rest, no significant Change in vitamin C could be shown
(283, 316), but a trend for an increase was apparent. This might be related to dietary
vitamin C intake during the study relative to the intake before the study (283).

Vitamin E

Vitamin E is a strong antioxidant that can support monocyte/maorophage-mediated
responses (717). Vitamin E and selenium have synergistic functions in tissues to reduce
damage to lipid membranes by the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) during
infections. The ability of vitamin E to scavenge lipid-soluble free radicals depends to
some extent on the status of 2 other antioxidant compounds, vitamin C and glutathione,
which are involved in reducing oxidized vitamin E back to a reusable (ie, able to be
oxidized) form. Additionally, vitamin E may improve T-oeII function by decreasing
production of prostaglandin E2 by macrophages, by modulating the amino acid
cascade initiated by lipoxygenase and/or cyclooxygenase (100). Furthermore, vitamin

E influences lymphocyte maturation, possibly by stabilizing membranes and allowing
enhanced binding of antigen-presenting cells to immature T cells through increased
expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1.

Copper

Copper has wide-ranging functions in the body, including many considered vital for
space flight (77, 502-505). This fact might have direct or indirect (when alterations

are induced by psychological stress or radiation stress) implications for nutrition and
nutritional status being possible causes or effects of alterations in immune system
function (2). Nonetheless, to date, little to no information is available about copper
metabolism during space flight.

"
"83","Zinc

In addition to its many essential functions in growth and development, zinc is

essential for the function of cells of the immune system (718). It has an important role

in promotion of wound healing and in maintenance of intestinal integrity. A deficiency

of zinc is also associated with reduced concentrations of insulin-like growth factor 1

and reduced rates of protein synthesis. Therefore, zinc deficiency could be especially
detrimental during immobility. However, zinc status of astronauts, as assessed by mean
serum zinc and urinary zinc excretion (admittedly, not the best markers of zinc status),
did not change after long-duration space flight (2). No data are available on the use

of zinc supplementation as a countermeasure during space flight.

Polyphenols

Naturally occurring polyphenols like resveratrol, quercetin, curcumin, anol catechins
have shown antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects (719). These effects seem to

be modulated through different pathways such as protein kinase-dependent pathways
activated by NF-KB or mitogens, as well as through preventing the generation of reactive
oxygen species by iron binding (720). Additionally, polyphenols seem to activate sirtuin

1 directly or indirectly and thereby are beneficial—besides having other functions—for
regulation of oxidative stress, inflammation, and autoimmunity. Accumulating evidence
has shown that polyphenols such as resveratrol, curcumin, catechins, anol quercetins
have a regulatory role in immune function in vitro and in vivo (506, 721 -726). Therefore,
they might also have beneficial effects in prevention of immune dysfunction during
long-term space missions, particularly because body iron stores are higher during space
flight. However, the role of polyphenols in sirtuin-‘l—mediated or iron-related regulation

in immune function remains to be studied. No results have been obtained during space
flight yet; however, a recently selected flight study will examine the role of increasing
polyphenol intake on bone health in particular.

Iron

As mentioned previously, the maintenance of iron homeostasis is extremely important
for human health. During space flight, it is well established that iron homeostasis is
altered (2, 469). The decreased red blood cell mass, increased serum ferritin, decreased
transferrin receptors, and increased serum iron all provide evidence for increased iron
storage during space flight. Furthermore, the space food system provides almost 3 times
the recommended intake (2). Iron plays an ambiguous role in human health: not only do
humans require it for survival, but also microorganisms (including pathogens) require iron
acquisition from the environment for their survival. Cells of the innate immune system
have genes that regulate proteins that can modulate iron homeostasis at the cellular and
systemic level to restrict iron availability to invading microorganisms. One such protein
is hepoidin, a key regulator of iron homeostasis and a critical factor in the anemia of
inflammation (727, 728). Hepoidin has been shown to be endogenously expressed by
innate immune cells—macrophages and neutrophils. It plays a role in making iron less
available by increasing intracellular iron sequestration and decreasing circulating iron
concentrations, and it is influenced by cytokines lL-6 anol lL-‘l (729, 730). Studies need
to be done to determine the role of increased iron stores during space flight on immune
function and reactivation of latent viruses.

"
"84","Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), such as omega-3 fatty acids, protect from
oxidative damage and radiation-related risks (99, 731), both of which are concerns
for space travelers. The mechanism of action of omega—3 fatty acids on these systems
is likely related to multiple pathways, but evidence exists that the nuclear transcription
factor NF-KB is affected differently by omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (732). This
transcription factor affects transcription of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and
inflammatory processes. NF-KB is activated by arachidonic acid and specifically by
prostaglandin E2, but Camandola and colleagues have found that eicosapentaenoio
acid (a PUFA) inhibits NF-KB activation (732).
We have reported elevated NF-KB after short-duration space flight (116). The effects
of omega—3 fatty acids on inflammatory cytokines, and specifically TNFo, are well
documented on the ground (116, 733-735), but warrant further studies during
space flight.
In summary, astronauts in space are generally not optimally nourished. Dietary intake
tailored to the astronauts’ needs may be beneficial for their immune system function.
Furthermore, the environmental stress of space flight can lead to changes in immune
response as well as in the nutritional needs of the individual astronaut. Nutrition for
optimal immune response and other functions is required to support optimal astronaut
hea|th during Iong-duration missions. However, it is important to be aware that “one size
does not fit all.” An immune nutrient intake profile that is appropriate for one astronaut
or one condition may be of minimal benefit for another individual or condition, and could
be harmful in other settings. Making evidenoe-based decisions in choosing the optimal
diet or formula will minimize adverse effects. To reach that level of individualized diet
for astronauts, further research is needed to assess whether diet can benefit immune
function during space flight. The use of basic clinical pharmacology, molecular biology,
and clinical research principles in the study of nutritional therapy during space flight and
analog studies will lead to answers on how to administer the right nutrients, in the right
amounts, at the right time during astronauts’ space missions.
-- --'T-1 ' .; - .-—-_-.-..- '- '- _....,,._ - .
i ' i'II'I'_I-_II . Ipﬁrt 1. _ .l' I. . i. . .1 I
'r.. #E ' 1' 'ﬁ'TL-J"" :_2. 4‘ I I' :. :l. "" ' I
1F"" . . :3 E- 1. :-5 .
ﬂLI- _ t... *-11 . .- __._.. l I- I]I : .r 1
. . - I’.:_|Il . Ii II, : - .-__ .
'. -_ . l-
a» r .. .3
f pi Hr - II.’ ' I '
{FF hyg— l - . .4.
. _I' I‘ll. .I-I- _:_ _
EFLQF: _; II II '- I
J 1 «ii =EE .h
.- J- ' |._'..._i ' _ In;- _
.. 1"" ""5""? —"" - ' -..
H t 5E1"" ; ' 1;;
Members of the STS-124 and Expedition 17 crews share a meal in the Zvezda module of the ISS.

"
"85","' Antioxmants and
OXIdatIve Stress

The space environment exposes astronauts to numerous sources of oxidative stress.
Some of these sources are extravehicular activity (EVA) and EVA prebreathe protocols,
exercise, diet, and radiation (469, 472, 736-738). After space flight, anabolic processes
and substrate competition between muscle rebuilding and host defense mechanisms
stress the antioxidant defense system and may contribute to postflight increases in
oxidative damage (683).
Hypoxic Conditions
As exploration missions come Closer to reality, we will need to better understand risks
associated with the type of EVAs that are currently planned for those types of missions.
Current mission designs could involve as many as 30,000 hours of EVA exploration time,
which is far more than the 20 total hours spent conducting EVAs during the entire Apollo
Program (739, 740). Future vehicles or exploration habitats will likely operate at 8.0
to 8.2 psia and 32% to 34% oxygen with the balance nitrogen (740). EVAs at 4.3 psia
would require some amount of oxygen prebreathing. As a comparison, ISS has operated
at an Earth equivalent of 14.7 psia and 21% oxygen. The terrestrial altitude equivalent
of 8 psia and 32% oxygen is about 6,000 to 8,000 feet (1829 to 2438 m), and would
represent a hypobaric hypoxic scenario. Concerns associated with prolonged hypobaric
hypoxic conditions include potential increased risk of vision impairment issues, acute
mountain sickness, sensorimotor impairment, alterations in cardiovascular and immune
function, and anorexia.
Extravehicular Activity
Extravehicular activity (EVA), or spacewalking, is a unique situation from a nutritional
perspective, because the EVA suit does not easily allow food consumption. On early
Shuttle missions, a 165-kcal fruit bar was custom-made to fit in the EVA suit, but it was
typically not consumed, and is no longer included. Crewmembers can go without food
for as long as 8 to 10 hours while they are preparing for and performing EVA. Nutritional
recommendations for EVA were designed to help maximize crew performance and
efficiency. When nutrition for EVA was reviewed in 1991, the recommendation for EVA
crewmembers was that they should consume an additional 500 kcal on days of EVA
(741). This was designed to account for the metabolic cost of EVA (~200 kcaI/h).
In 2000, another review of this situation was requested by NASA’s Flight Medicine
Division. The resulting recommendation was to provide food items for consumption
during EVA preparation (as Close as possible to the donning of helmets). The food items
should contain 300 to 500 kcal, with about 70 to 100 g of carbohydrate and a high
content of soluble fiber. Candidate items are reviewed to ensure that, in the attempt to
meet the basic criteria, undesirable nutrients or additives are not included, and that crew
preferences are accounted for. It was also recommended that crewmembers reconsider
use of the in-suit food bar, or that alternatives be sought.

"
"86","Fluid intake during EVA is also a topic of concern. Crewmembers lose 6 to 8 ounces
(177 to 237 mL) of fluid per hour during an EVA. The current EVA suit contains a

24- or 32—ounoe (710 or 946 mL) drink bag. Only water is used (early EVAs included
flavored beverages, but a problem during a lunar EVA resulted in a programmatic
decision to include only water). Provision of in-suit fluid is an important factor in

suit design. For the current suit, use of the 32-ounoe drink bag is recommended.

The development of a larger, disposable drink bag is highly encouraged. The disposable
drink bag should be designed so that a flavored drink (such as the current Shuttle food
system beverages) could be used to increase palatability and intake, assuming that the
technical concerns can be eliminated.

Because missions to explore a non-Earth surface (planetary or asteroid) will likely include
EVAs similar in duration to current ISS EVAs (8 to 10 h) but more frequent (2-3 times per
week, instead of 2-4 times/6 months), a Clear need exists for development of nutrition
support during EVAs. A nutrition support system will need to fit the lunar suit design.
The definition of the optimal nutrition support system will need to be based on the
results of ground studies designed to optimize performance, minimize fatigue, and
minimize oxidative damage from a high partial pressure of oxygen in the suit.

Reactive Oxygen Species and Exercise

Exercise-induoed fatigue and muscle atrophy are mediated in part by reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Electron spin resonance spectroscopy technology confirmed earlier
findings from the 1950s suggesting that short-lived reactive intermediate molecules like
ROS are present in skeletal muscle after exercise (742). Since then, numerous studies
have supported a role of ROS in skeletal muscle fatigue (742—744). Mitochondria are
the major source of ROS in muscle cells, where a fine balance of ROS exists between
maximizing force and minimizing fatigue (736). Antioxidant-mediated depletion of ROS
from unfatigued muscle yields decreased production of skeletal muscle force (745).

On the other hand, excess ROS can be detrimental in terms of fatigue. ROS can
denature proteins directly associated with the sarooplasmio reticulum Ca2+ release
mechanism (746), thus compromising tension development. Also, rat studies show

that xanthine oxidase-induoed ROS yields increased diaphragm fatigue, and that the
elevated ROS during intense exercise is implicated in the onset of muscle fatigue (747).
Furthermore, decreased antioxidant status lowers exercise capacity and increases
onset of fatigue in human and animal studies (742, 744).

Astronauts perform prolonged upper—body exercise during EVA activity, and one of

the limiting factors in completing EVA tasks is forearm and hand muscle fatigue due

to extensive tool operation. The fatigue often requires orewmembers to stop and rest,
thereby prolonging the duration of EVA, and limits the number of tasks performed during
each EVA. To date, there is little evidence showing that antioxidant supplementation has
a benefit for improving muscle performance and inhibiting fatigue. Given the nature of
the requirement for homeostasis of redox systems, there is a potential for antioxidant
overload to decrease muscle force potential instead of having a protective effect.
Radiation Exposure

Astronauts are exposed to highly ionizing radiation, in addition to secondary radiations
resulting from interactions of ionizing radiation with shielding materials or the human
body. Biological effects of radiation include damage to DNA from a direct hit from

an ion track, oxidative damage from generated ROS, and oxidative damage induced

"
"87","by a bystander effect (99, 748, 749). A bystander effect occurs when cells damaged by
radiation particles secrete oytokines or other proteins that can generate ROS in cells that
are not destroyed (750).

Oxidative Damage Markers During Space Flight and in Ground Analogs
Evidence for oxidative stress resulting from space flight exposure exists in multiple
tissues, including ocular tissue (670, 751), urinary and blood biomarkers of damage to
DNA, lipids, and protein (6, 469, 684, 752), and in gene expression (753, 754). Plasma
malondialdehyde (MDA), 8-iso-prostaglandin F20 (PGqu), and urinary 8-hydroxy-2’-
deoxyguanosine (8OHdG) have been measured during and after flight as indicators of
lipid peroxidation (MDA and PGon) and DNA damage (8OHdG) (4, 684). A significant
elevation of urinary 8OHdG has been noted after long-duration missions (Mir anol ISS)
(6). These data are supported by results from the ground-based analog NEEMO, in
which crewmembers underwent 10- to 14-day saturation dives (476, 755). Urinary PGon
was significantly decreased during flight but elevated about 2.5-fold after flight (684),
and plasma MDA was increased both during and after flight (684). In a Russian 120-day
bed rest study, increased concentrations of markers of lipid peroxidation were found in
subjects, and this increase was mitigated with vitamin E (756).

The apparent increases in oxidative damage observed during and after flight could be
caused by a number of factors, including altered DNA repair mechanisms, decreased
antioxidant defense systems, or simply increased oxidative stress. Microgravity does
not affect the repair of doubIe-strand Chromosome breaks (757, 758), but evidence
exists that downregulation of antioxidant defense systems occurs during space flight
(759). Along with increases in markers of oxidative damage and decreases in antioxidant
defense systems, a decrease in total antioxidant capacity also occurs.

Antioxidants and Related Nutrients: Selenium, Vitamin E, Vitamin G

Selenium has been shown to play a role in the maintenance or induction of cytochrome
P450, pancreatic function, DNA repair, enzyme activation, immune system function,
and detoxification of heavy metals (760). Selenium is also a cofactor for glutathione
peroxidase, which plays a role in the reduction of organic peroxides and hydrogen
peroxide. Selenium has also been shown to be necessary for iodine metabolism.
Postflight reductions in serum selenium of more than 10% have been observed after
ISS flights (6). Whether this is related to intake or metabolism is not known.

Deficiency of selenium can lead to impaired immune function, i||ness (Keshan disease
and Kashin-Beok’s disease), or even death. Excess selenium can lead to problems
affecting gastrointestinal, neurological, cardiopulmonary, and renal systems (760).
Toxicity is not likely to occur except when selenium is consumed in large amounts in
dietary supplements, but care must be taken to avoid toxicity despite the relationship
of selenium to cancer risk and antioxidant status.

Vitamin E is a lipid-soluble, ohain-breaking antioxidant found in body tissues, and

is also the first line of defense against lipid peroxidation reactions. Eight naturally
occurring compounds have vitamin E activity: 4 tooopherol derivatives (0-, y-, 6-, and
B-tooopherol) and 4 toootrienol derivatives (o-, y-, 6-, and B-tocotrienol) (761). The
tooopherols that are most abundant in biological systems are a- and v-tooopherol, but
small amounts of 6-tooopherol anol v-tooopheryl quinine are also present. About 90%
of the tooopherol found in human plasma is in the form of a-tooopherol (762). After ISS
crewmembers had spent 4 to 6 months in space, their plasma y-tooopherol was 50%
less than preflight levels (6). No change in a-tooopherol occurred in these subjects.

"
"88",":5 2.
Egg 3 2
E l:
E111 IE- 1.
a 5 ﬁn.
ﬂ 3--
a n.
if ‘3? #ﬂe‘i‘ﬁﬁﬂﬁﬁ‘fﬁﬁ 345’? ﬁsh 13"": ﬁeﬁaﬁﬂﬁﬁﬁﬁ $435:
E"" 4.4:
E 3.1: ,
: ___ W Figure 45. Serum a—tocophero/ (top left)
E E and y—tocophero/ (top right), and total
I: E 2‘” vitamin E:/ipid ratio (left) before, during,
“I and after long-duration space flight.
E ”I All data are mean i SD.
l'ﬂ
E m: a a a
whﬁu‘hi} “*5 ﬁn ﬁigﬁfﬁ'ﬁaﬁ £131?
Oxidative stress can increase in microgravity anoI high-radiation environments
(683, 684, 763), and the antioxidant properties of vitamin E may help to counteract
the free-radioal damage caused by high-Iinear energy transfer radiation in space.
Pretreatment with antioxidants may help decrease radiation damage during missions
(764), and it may be necessary to provide enough vitamin E for astronauts’ blood levels
of the vitamin to be higher during space flight than on Earth. However, knowledge gaps
weaken the evidence for use of vitamin E as a countermeasure. Clinical trials have
documented negative side effects of pharmacologic vitamin E supplementation alone or
with other antioxidants; it can increase risks of cancer in humans and animals (765-768).
The term “vitamin C” actually refers to 2 different compounds, ascorbic acid and
dehydroasoorbio acid, both of which have activity against scurvy (769). Vitamin C
functions as an antioxidant because it acts as a reducing agent for most physiologically
relevant reactive oxygen species, reactive nitrogen species, singlet oxygen, and
hypochlorite. It serves as a cofactor for enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of
collagen, carnitine, and neurotransmitters (769). Vitamin C also provides antioxidant
protection by returning o-tooopherol to its biologically active state during lipid oxidation.
The reducing agents glutathione and either reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) or reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) regenerate
the oxidation products of ascorbate (769).
It has been suggested that vitamin C requirements should be greater for persons
who are under excessive physical or emotional stress, given the role of ascorbate
in the biosynthesis of steroid hormones and neurotransmitters. However, no substantial
data show that vitamin C metabolism is altered in healthy subjects under mental or
emotional stress (762).
As a cofactor in collagen synthesis, vitamin C has been investigated for potential effects
on bone health. Although in the Framingham Study higher vitamin C intake was found
to be associated with lower bone mass (770), the significance of this association was
marginal when data were adjusted for potassium intake. This suggests that vitamin C

"
"89","may be a secondary factor in bone loss, related to fruit and vegetable reduction

(274, 771 -773), as described elsewhere in this text. Other studies have found that
vitamin C intake or supplement use is related to improved bone health and bone mass,
but this relationship depends on adequate calcium intake (774-777). Vitamin C has been
related to cataract and cancer incidence (778-780), both of concern for space travelers.
Deficiency of vitamin C leads to fatigue, depressed immune function, scurvy (fatigue,
muscle cramps, bruised and/or bleeding gums), and eventually even death. As noted

in the introduction, scurvy resulted in more sai|or deaths during the age of sai| than

all other causes of death combined (1). Toxicity of vitamin C leads to gastrointestinal
distress, and has been reported in subjects consuming more than 1000 mg/d (778).
Vitamin C assessments of ISS crewmembers have been conducted, with generally

no changes after landing relative to before launch (unpublished data). Recent long- and
short-duration bed rest studies documented no statistically significant change in vitamin
C, but results showed a trend for an increase, which might be related to dietary intake
during the study relative to the subjects’ nominal intake (134, 316).

The stability of vitamin C in food supplies has been studied, and it is generally unstable
at a neutral or alkaline pH and in high-oxygen environments (781). Vitamin C is also
unstable when exposed to light or heat (781), and in irradiated foods (782, 783).

Salem (783) found that gamma irradiation of fresh onion bulbs significantly reduced
their vitamin C content. This group also found that vitamin C content of onion bulbs
had decreased about 50% after 6 months of storage. The destructive effects of gamma
irradiation (10 kGy) on vitamin C were also evident in commercial spices such as

basi|, black pepper, Cinnamon, nutmeg, oregano, parsley, rosemary, and sage (784).
Exposure of these spices to gamma rays for >3 months resulted in a marked increase
in the concentration of quinone radicals. Evaluation of vitamin C stability in space foods
showed an average loss of 27% after 1 year of storage (785). Fortunately, the vitamin C
content of food items and potential menus is high enough that, depending on mission
profile, intake of vitamin C might still meet requirements (785).

A major concern for space flight is the possibility that vitamin C could be degraded

in foods during extended-duration missions when space foods are exposed to large
amounts of radiation and undergo long-term storage (foods may be sent to Mars in
advance of the crew, and left there for up to 5 y). This could be catastrophic.
Free-radical formation is increased in space because greater amounts of radiation

are present than on Earth. Because of this and increases in other oxidative stressors,
antioxidants such as vitamin C are in greater demand by the body to act as buffers and
minimize the oxidative damage. Studies have shown that supplementation with vitamin
C and other antioxidants can modify human tissue radiosensitivity and protect DNA
against damage (786, 787). Just as important to consider, however, is the possibility
that vitamin C could induce DNA damage. Cai and colleagues (787) found that vitamin
C can act as an antioxidant to prevent DNA damage caused by ionizing radiation, but
in the presence of copper, it can also act as a reducing agent to induce DNA damage.
Because vitamin C can reduce redox-aotive metals such as iron and copper, this
“antioxidant” can increase the pro-oxidant Chemistry of these metals (788). Thus,
vitamin C can serve as both a pro-oxidant and an antioxidant, and the amount of it
required by exploration crewmembers needs to be carefully addressed (as does the
amount of almost all nutrients).

Vitamin C content and stability in the space food supply need to be determined.
Evaluation of the impact of vitamin C supplementation during exposure to oxygen or
high-Iinear energy transfer radiation should be investigated before recommendations

"
"90","can be made for supplement use during flight. This should be evaluated in a coordinated
effort to find an antioxidant profile for space travelers. After data have been gathered
about vitamin C status during and after flight, and preferably after data are available
pertaining to the influence of space flight-induced stress on vitamin C, an evaluation
of intake requirements needs to be made.
. II . I I
l' I.:I""- 1.: r 'r
.I I. l
.r 1.
H I- -_
r ‘H * ‘-
r In- .. ﬁr ,. ‘ r'—- - ,_ *
. _ — I I I T ."" II : 3f I J. "" - .- . III
. I'l-I' - f' ' -""""' I-I'I‘II. --,': -:.|- II I/r I; _..-.--..-_ '.""-..' I
t ;;r..<-F- - :“ -32; 11*- _1. "" "" . ' - ' .
' I I - I..' ' I. I. ' I I: - | 1. ' . '
' g' -' 1' -' .. , . .r. ""
, __ _ _ y. ,_.. - ‘
' I . I. ._ . _ 3r /£}' u.__ _ 1
' ~ ¢a...Ir’E-""' -. ~.-I_': -. . a .' :51:- . . _,f .I_ .
Flu!”- _II_II -._II_ _.-l .xl . .- f. h‘iLi-l‘
__I .I - . I --'- - hit""; I'..-,."" ""I _ F’ -
.' 1-* I .e' -._ .- L f ""
_ ‘ ci- ' ""I ah f I . _,.-..._ ‘ I I
IIII'l _ IIIII . ﬂu nib. .
. _ h . I . . 3’ II
_III :I . . .I {I T . 2..» 3:: . III A ____ 1“
-"" - ; x . i“ * f' .. '
I h . -.- __'-:i.'.I {Eitr- - .-
. —--;.I:III_ __ - L...""- 1 I -' _ - .4 I ﬁx
.1. 'fi'ii'ﬁih .. .- ""'.-
.1: L"" Jr ' f g "" ' _ _ '.
- _ _ _. .ll,..""ﬂ-
.- l r I I3” -
I .12-?
I ' I
Expedition 16 Commander Peggy Whitson pauses for a photo While working on the S5 Truss
during Bearing Motor Roll Ring Module removal and replacement operations.

"
"91","Pharmacology and

Drug-Nutrlent Interactions
Supplements versus Whole Foods
The benefits of supplements are such that individual nutrients can be obtained when
the diet cannot meet needs. Drawbacks to supplements include the potential for side
effects, interactions with medications, and, with respect to bone, the fact that isolated
nutrients may not provide the same protective effect on bone as they would in the
matrix of the whole food. For example, more than 100 phytochemicals in tomatoes likely
contribute to the chemoprotective effect of tomato puree in addition to the lycopene
known to protect against certain types of cancers. Tomato puree has much stronger
dose-dependent, antimutagenic effects and lowers biomarkers of oxidative stress more
than pure lycopene alone (789, 790). Similarly, omega-3 fatty acids have different effects
on vasodilation, depending on whether they are supplied as a supplement or in
a whole food (791, 792).
Besides the fact that supplements lack the synergistic effects of nutrients in whole
foods, there are numerous examples of negative side effects associated with
supplement use. Symptoms can range from gastrointestinal effects, dizziness,
or decreased white blood cell count (from ipriflavone, which is synthesized from
the soy isoflavone daidzein) to increased cancer risk (B-carotene in the CARET study)
or increased risk of stroke (667, 793-795).
Provision of nutrients through supplements also ignores the fact that in some cases,
for example the omega 3:0mega 6 ratio, the negative effects of other foods cannot
be overcome simply by provision of supplements. Although this phenomenon is more
difficult to document, it is likely the reason that epidemiological data continue to show
benefits of dietary patterns over supplements.
The issue of supplement use often arises with discussion of nutrient requirements for
space travelers and the use of nutrients as countermeasures to the negative effects
of space flight, especially oxidative damage and radiation-induced cancer risk. It is
generally agreed that nutrients should be provided to astronauts in standard foods
instead of supplements (35, 425, 426, 741, 796). The need for more detailed information
about the “psychophysiology of hunger and eating” was noted decades ago during the
early space programs (8), but this topic has yet to be studied in detail. It is clear from
astronauts’ experiences on the Mir that when humans are in an isolated environment
far from home, food becomes a psychological factor that can be a source of support
or a source of frustration.
NASA currently does not recommend that astronauts take general nutritional
supplements during flight, for several reasons. Experience to date indicates that
crewmembers do not consume the recommended amount of energy intake, and
accordingly, intake of many individual nutrients is therefore also inadequate.
Unfortunately, the concept of a vitamin and mineral supplement to remedy this is
unwarranted, as the primary problem—inadequate intake of food/energy—will not be
resolved by a supplement. This situation may even be worsened if crewmembers believe
that taking the supplement reduces the need for adequate food consumption, and thus
eat even less. Furthermore, when many nutrients are provided as oral supplements,

"
"92","they are not metabolized by the body as they are when in foods (797). Changes in
bioavailability and metabolism of nutrients can increase the risk of malnutrition.

Vitamin or mineral supplements should be used only when the nutrient content of the
nominal food system does not meet the requirements for a given nutrient, or when data
show that the efficacy of single (or multiple) nutrient supplementation is advantageous.
To date, 1 supplement has met this standard, and that is vitamin D. Vitamin D
supplements have been provided to all US crewmembers on ISS. Early crews received
400 IU vitamin D3 per day (6), but recently this was raised to 800 IU per day (425); this
level allows maintenance of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D around 75 nmol/L (31).

Before a supplement is recommended, a Clear deficit of that nutrient in the space food
system must be identified, as was the case with vitamin D. Stability of nutrients in the
form of supplements would also need to be addressed; shelf lives for exploration travel
must be particularly long. Supplements, if they are recommended, would need to be
tested in ground models for their efficacy in maintaining nutrient status, their stability
over a long duration (3 to 5 y), and their potential interaction with pharmaceuticals.
Most importantly, supplements will need rigorous testing to demonstrate that the level
used is not toxic to other body systems, and will need close monitoring during flight to
ensure that their interactions with the space flight environment do not prevent them from
being effective or safe. For example, ground-based studies have shown that high doses
of antioxidants, when provided in situations where oxidant stressors are present (such
as Cigarette smoking), can actually have a detrimental effect (798). Recent studies have
also found that supplementation with certain antioxidants such as vitamin E and vitamin
A can increase risks of cancer and aII-Cause mortality (767, 768).

An understanding of interactions between nutrients and drugs used in medical care

is necessary to implement safe and effective medical care and clinical intervention
operations for astronauts on long-duration missions. The most common studies of
nutrient-drug interactions concern their effects on a nutrient’s or drug’s absorption,
distribution, biotransformation, and excretion.

Normally, drugs must undergo biotransformation to allow their activation or excretion.
For the activity of a drug to be terminated by excretion, the compound must be made
water-soluble by biotransformation. For most drugs, this process yields a water-
so|ub|e compound that is less active than the original compound. Biotransformation
occurs in 2 phases. Phase I is an oxidation or hydrolysis reaction to expose, add, or
Cleave a functional group. Cytochrome P450 enzymes are involved in this process.
Humans have 12 families of cytochrome P450 enzymes, but CYP1, CYP2, and CYP3
are the forms most commonly used in drug metabolism (799). Cytochrome P450
enzymes are unique in their ability to use a wide range of substrates (800). Phase II
biotransformation involves the conjugation of the parent compound to a polar group
(acetate, gluouronides, sulfates, amino acids, glutathione), which inactivates most
drugs. Biotransformation of drugs is influenced by several factors that could be affected
by space flight and the space food system: dietary factors, nutrient metabolism,
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and antacids and proton pump inhibitors.

Dietary Factors

Dietary factors (either excess or deficiency) can influence both phases of drug
biotransformation. In phase I, 3 factors are required: a sufficient energy source
(because of the high energy demands of this system), a protein source for enzyme
synthesis, and iron for cytochrome formation (801). Phase II requires glucose,
sulfur—oontaining amino acids, and glutathione (801).

"
"93","The effects of nutrients on drug metabolism have been well studied in animal models;
however, relatively few dietary factors have been studied in humans (801, 802). Results
from animal studies must be carefully weighed because of some differences between
the cytochrome P450 enzymes of animals and humans.

One of the most weII-documented food-drug interactions is between grapefruit juice
and a number of medications (803, 804). Flavonoid compounds such as naringin,
naringenin, limonin, and obacunone, which are present in grapefruit juice, act as
substrates for particular intestinal cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP3A4 and CYP1A2).
Within hours of ingestion, grapefruit juice decreases CYP3A4 protein expression for

up to 24 hours (805, 806). The decrease in CYP3A4 is associated with a decreased
capability for drug metabolism, and therefore increased drug bioavailability.

Other foods, nutrients, or supplements known to affect phase I and II biotransformations
and cytochrome P450 enzymes include protein, carbohydrates, lipids, certain vitamins,
minerals, char—broiled foods, red wine, monosodium glutamate and aspartate, and herbs
such as St. John’s wort (801, 802, 807-810). Generally, high-protein diets increase drug
metabolism, and Iow-protein diets decrease drug metabolism. For instance, antipyrine
and theophylline are metabolized more rapidly when subjects are on a high-protein diet
(802). Other macronutrients, including carbohydrates, can affect phase I and phase II
biotransformation reactions when intakes are very high or low. Theophylline (for asthma)
is particularly sensitive to dietary protein:carbohydrate ratios; increasing the ratio can
decrease effectiveness of the drug, and decreasing the ratio may lead to toxicity of the
drug (811). Fatty acids in the diet can also affect cytochrome P450 enzymes because
they can be metabolized by these enzymes. Specifically, CYP2E1 is responsible for

lipid peroxidation, and activity of this enzyme is enhanced in the presence of highly
polyunsaturated fatty acids such as fish oils.

Metabolism of Nutrients

Some nutrients are metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes; therefore, drugs or
other nutrients that alter the activity of these enzymes can alter nutrient metabolism.
Vitamin D and vitamin A are 2 examples of nutrients whose metabolism involves
cytochrome P450 enzymes.

Exposure of 7-dehydrocholesterol to sunlight converts this substrate to previtamin D3.
Previtamin D3 undergoes an isomerization to form vitamin D3, a biologically inactive
compound. CYP27A is a mitochondrial mixed-function oxidase that is responsible

for hydroxylating vitamin D3 to form 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 (812). CYP3A4 has been
found to be a 25-hydroxylase as well (813). CYP27B converts 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 to
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. CYP24 is a 24-hydroxylase that hydroxylates the vitamin D
side Chain and ultimately terminates hormonal activity of the vitamin. Inhibition of CYP24
has recently been targeted in the development of novel anti-cancer drugs. Because
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 exerts antiproliferative and differentiating effects on many cell
types including cancer, preventing its inactivation by inhibiting CYP24 activity may prove
to be beneficial in treating cancer (814). Certain drugs are known to activate CYP24
activity, including rifampin, isoniazid, and phenobarbital (815, 816). Several studies show
a relationship between the use of these drugs and osteomaIaCia (817, 818), which is
caused by a deficiency of vitamin D. The discovery of the involvement of CYP3A4 in the
metabolism of vitamin D may explain the effects on vitamin D metabolism of numerous
drugs, including inducers or inhibitors of this enzyme (for example, grapefruit juice,
erythromycin, omeprazole, carbamazepine, and dexamethasone), or implicate them

in unexplained effects on vitamin D metabolism.

"
"94","Vitamin A metabolism involves the actions of CYP1A2 and CYP4A4 in the conversion
of retinol to retinoic acid (819, 820). Induoers of CYP1A2 (Cigarette smoke, cruciferous
vegetables, broiled beef, rifampin) may affect vitamin A metabolism.

Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors

First-generation monoamine oxidase inhibitors include agents such as antidepressants
(phenelzine, tranylcypromine, pargyline, anol selegiline), Chemotherapeutic drugs
(procarbazine), antiprotozoal drugs (furazolidone), anol analgesics (meperidine).
Monoamine oxidase is responsible for metabolizing dietary phenylethylamines, including
tyramine, in the gastrointestinal tract and in the liver. Inhibitors of monoamine oxidase
prevent the breakdown of these compounds, and therefore the compounds are taken
up in the brain. In the brain, tyramine displaces norepinephrine from storage vesicles,
which results in release of a flood of norepinephrine at synapses. Acute hypertension
and the potential for stroke or myocardial infarction could result from this process
(801). Fermented foods and protein-rich foods that have begun to spoil are rich in
phenylethylamines (801).

Antacids and Proton Pump Inhibitors

By altering the pH of the stomach, chronic antacid or proton pump medications

can negatively affect the bioavailability of several nutrients, including phosphate,
thiamin, folate, vitamin B12, vitamin C, iron, and vitamin A (801, 821, 822). Antacids
can precipitate folio acid at a pH greater than 4.0, thus rendering it insoluble and not
available for absorption (823). A high pH also affects thiamin bioavailability because
the vitamin is not stable at high pH (801). Similarly, at a neutral pH, the antioxidant
action of vitamin C on dietary nitrites is hindered. Normally, dietary nitrite is quickly
reduced to nitric oxide by ascorbic acid in the acidic gastric juice and it is then
absorbed by the mucosa. However, at neutral pH, the nitrite does not react with
ascorbic acid and instead accumulates in the stomach, which can increase the
likelihood that potentially carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds will be formed (822).
These Changes are observed mostly in subjects who are infected by Helicobacter
pylori and are taking proton-pump inhibitors (822).

Vitamin B12 and vitamin A are also malabsorbed at higher pH because an acidic
environment is essential for their release from dietary proteins. Because large stores
of vitamin B12 exist in the body, malabsorption of this vitamin is unlikely to lead to
deficiency unless a subject has been taking proton pump inhibitors chronically for

at least 2 years (821). This would be particularly harmful if vitamin B12 stores were
low before initiation of therapy.

Summary of Pharmacology and Drug-Nutrient Interactions

Currently no data are available that pertain to specific drug-nutrient interactions
during space flight. The main concerns for a long-duration mission involve use of
pharmacological agents that are taken chronically. Side effects will be especially harmful
if the status of all nutrients is not adequate at the beginning of a long-duration mission.
Addressing these concerns of drug-nutrient interactions will be especially crucial for
crewmembers who embark on exploration-Class missions lasting several years.

"
"95","As we write this section of the book in the spring of 2014, the Space Shuttle has been
retired for a few years, the International Space Station (ISS) has blossomed into an
incredible science platform, commercial vehicles are delivering cargo to the ISS (and
in the coming few years they will transport crews to and from ISS as well), preparations
are underway for the first 1-year stay on ISS, and NASA is targeting development of

a vehicle that will allow exploration beyond low Earth orbit, destination at this point
TBD—to be determined. These exploration-class missions will require a food system
with items having even longer shelf lives than those currently available for the ISS
missions (56, 824). As NASA designs the vehicles for these missions, the Challenges
for the food system will be very similar to those met by all previous space food systems.
Mass and volume of the food system and its associated packaging will need to be
limited. Refrigerators and freezers will most likely not be available. Acceptability of the
food items will become even more important on a multi-year mission. New Challenges
for this exploration food system will include the need for a 3- to 5-year shelf life and
the possibility that the increased radiation encountered on a trip to Mars might affect
the nutritional content and quality of the food over time.

Long-term plans for exploration will include the establishment of habitats, which will
no doubt include the growing of plants to aid in the recycling of air and water within
the habitat (825). These crops will be available for use in the food system. The presence
of partial gravity will allow crops to be processed into ingredients (for example, milling
wheat into flour) and then used to prepare menu items for crew consumption (56). The
research to support these endeavors, especially the growing of crops that will sustain
a crew and not just supplement meals made on Earth, still has some distance to go.
These Iong-term missions will require careful planning of nutrition. Understanding
nutrient requirements and utilizing the food system to fulfill them will allow mitigation
of some of the negative effects of microgravity on human physiology. Even a marginal
nutrient deficiency over a long enough period could be devastating. After the
requirements are defined and we have a detailed understanding of absorption,
metabolism, and excretion of each nutrient, provision of these nutrients and an
understanding of their stability in the space environment (for the months to years
before they are consumed) will be critical.

Nutrition is essential for health—on Earth and in space. Determining the nutritional
requirements for travelers on short-, medium-, and Iong-duration exploration missions
will be crucial for ensuring crew health and safety, during the mission and after their
return. Only the surface has been scratched in our understanding of the ability of
nutrients and nutrition to mitigate negative effects of space travel, but the initial results
are promising already, as documented throughout this text. In many ways, nutrition
offers a suite of countermeasures that require no more crew time than that already
allotted for meals. While care Clearly needs to be taken to avoid excess amounts of
any nutrient, the risks of using nutritional countermeasures relative to those of using
pharmacological countermeasures are negligible.

"
"96","This document details the evidence collected to date that shows why inadequate
nutrition is a risk during Iong-term space travel. The evidence is substantial, and drives I
a significant ongoing effort to understand and optimize nutrition for space travelers and
to use nutrition as a tool to mitigate the health risks of microgravity exposure. Just as
for the sailors who left Europe in sailing ships, it is not enough to have food; one must
have the right food.
- “7w:
-"""" ""r“ ' - -“'T'=-';“;'~-§‘*""""3h w Trff-JE'??:
-. -- '- E— -i-._.' .1. .-.. II I...-
.-'-' ---.._ _""-n--.""""*.11 _.Fl“ .. : '-""""‘ Hit;
.; -_.-.- -.- .-. _- FE _'- _ _
_ -I H 1- "" . _-
- IL? .1}? I ‘: mil?! ‘JHr' l. I
"" "" 2.1.3; ‘. ..~- ""hm”
._.__;.q _.“... '|:-"" _..."""""":13:""'
,1“ . -""-I"".""-. _ q. . . I
I ""*1 r;- ""E- 1} HT. 4'I'Eﬁ‘1‘.‘
' ' I. .:r|l-."" _‘L I- ' pf I .l
- _ . . m r.
‘34,"".
_ . rl' ' r. . '-_I.- _' 1| |
- ..-. . :'. '
' I- I ""r fa 5-1:: .- FF.
Eﬁg _J . FE‘.
' .l E:
.‘-: 24f fir
. .3. .-
. Inf .f

"
"97","References

1. Bown SR. Scurvy. New York: St. Martin's Press; 2003.

2. Smith SM, Zwart SR, Kloeris V, Heer M. Nutritional biochemistry of space flight. New York:
Nova Science Publishers; 2009.

3. MarshaII—Bowman K, Barratt MR, Gibson CR. Ophthalmic changes and increased intracranial
pressure associated with long duration spaceflight: an emerging understanding. Acta
Astronaut. 2013;87:77—87.

4. Smith SM, Davis-Street JE, Rice BL, Nillen JL, et al. Nutritional status assessment in
semiclosed environments: ground-based and space flight studies in humans. J Nutr. 2001
Ju|;131(7):2053-61 .

5. Soller BR, Cabrera M, Smith SM, Sutton JP. Smart medical systems with application to
nutrition and fitness in space. Nutrition. 2002;18(10):930-6.

6. Smith SM, Zwart SR, Block G, Rice BL, et al. The nutritional status of astronauts is
altered after Iong-term space flight aboard the International Space Station. J Nutr. 2005
Mar;135(3):437-43.

7. Zwart SR, Launius RD, Coen GK, Morgan JLL, et al. Body mass changes during Iong-duration
spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2014;85:897—904.

8. Smith MC, Berry CA. Dinner on the moon. Nutr Today. 1969;4:37-42.

9. Waligora JM, Horrigan DJ. Metabolism and heat dissipation during Apollo EVA periods.

In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, Berry CA, editors. Biomedical results of Apollo (NASA SP—368).
Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1975. p. 115-28.

10. Lane HW, Gretebeck RJ, Smith SM. Nutrition, endocrinology, and body composition during
space flight. Nutr Res. 1998 Nov;18(11):1923—34.

11. Lane HW, Gretebeck RJ, Schoeller DA, Davis—Street J, et al. Comparison of ground-based
and space flight energy expenditure and water turnover in middle-aged healthy male US
astronauts. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Jan;65(1):4-12.

12. Stein TP, Leskiw MJ, Schluter MD, Hoyt RW, et al. Energy expenditure and balance
during spaceflight on the space shuttle. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol.
1999;276:R1739-R48.

13. Schoeller DA, Ravussin E, Schutz Y, Acheson KJ, et al. Energy expenditure by doubly labeled
water: validation in humans and proposed calculation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol. 1986 May;250(5 Pt 2):R823-30.

14. Gretebeck RJ, Schoeller DA, Gibson EK, Lane HW. Energy expenditure during antiorthostatic
bed rest (simulated microgravity). J Appl Physiol. 1995 Jun;78(6):2207-11.

15. Stein TP, Schluter MD, Leskiw MJ. Cortisol, insulin and leptin during space flight and bed rest.
J Gravit Physiol. 1999 Jul;6(1):P85—6.

16. Lovejoy JC, Smith SR, Zachwieja JJ, Bray GA, et al. Low-dose T(3) improves the bed rest
model of simulated weightlessness in men and women. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 1999
Aug;277(2 Pt 1):E370-9.

17. World Health Organization. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a joint FAO/WHO/UNU
expert consultation. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1985.

"
"98","18. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty
acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids (macronutrients). Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press; 2002.

19. Leach CS, Alfrey CP, Suki WN, Leonard JI, et al. Regulation of body fluid compartments
during short-term spaceflight. J Appl Physiol. 1996 Jul;81(1):105-16.

20. Smith SM, Wastney ME, O'Brien KO, Morukov BV, et al. Bone markers, calcium metabolism,
and calcium kinetics during extended-duration space flight on the Mir space station. J Bone
Miner Res. 2005 Feb;20(2):208-18.

21. Heer M, Boerger A, Kamps N, Mika C, et al. Nutrient supply during recent European missions.
Pflugers Arch. 2000;441(2-3 Suppl):R8-14.

22. Altman PL, Talbot JM. Nutrition and metabolism in spaceflight. J Nutr. 1987;117:421-7.

23. Johnson PC, Leach CS, Rambaut PC. Estimates of fluid and energy balances of Apollo 17.
Aerosp Med. 1973;44:1227-30.

24. Rambaut PC, Smith MC, Jr, Wheeler HO. Nutritional studies. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF,
Berry CA, editors. Biomedical results of Apollo (NASA SP-368). Washington, DC: National
Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1975. p. 277-302.

25. Rambaut PC, Leach CS, Johnson PC. Calcium and phosphorus change of the Apollo 17
crew members. Nutr Metab. 1975;18(2):62-9.

26. Stein TP, Schluter MD. Excretion of amino acids by humans during space flight. Acta
Astronaut. 1998 Jan-Apr;42(1-8):205-14.

27. Heer M. Nutritional interventions related to bone turnover in European space missions and
simulation models. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):853-6.

28. Rambaut P, Leach C, Leonard J. Observations in energy balance in man during spaceflight.
Am J Physiol. 1977;233:R208-12.

29. Leach CS, Rambaut PC. Biochemical responses of the Skylab crewmen: an overview.

In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical results from Skylab (NASA SP-377).
Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1977. p. 204-16.

30. Drummer C, Hesse C, Baisch F, Norsk P, et al. Water and sodium balances and their relation
to body mass changes in microgravity. Eur J Clin Invest. 2000 Dec;30(12):1066-75.

31. Smith SM, Heer MA, Shackelford L, Sibonga JD, et al. Benefits for bone from resistance
exercise and nutrition in Iong-duration spaceflight: evidence from biochemistry and
densitometry. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 May 1;27:1896-906.

32. Bourland C, Kloeris V, Rice B, Vodovotz Y. Food systems for space and planetary flights.

In: Lane HW, Schoeller DA, editors. Nutrition in spaceflight and weightlessness models.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2000. p. 19-40.

33. Smith SM, Lane HW. Spaceflight metabolism and nutritional support. In: Barratt MR, Pool SL,
editors. Principles of clinical medicine for space flight. New York: Springer; 2008. p. 559-76.

34. Smith SM, Zwart SR. Nutritional biochemistry of spaceflight. Adv Clin Chem. 2008;46:87-130.

35. Lane HW, Smith SM. Nutrition in space. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, Ross AC, editors.
Modern nutrition in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
1999. p. 783-8.

36. Agureev AN, Kalandarov S, Segal DE. [Optimization of cosmonauts' nutrition during the
period of acute adaptation and at the closing stage of the mission]. Aviakosm Ekolog Med.
1997;31(6):47-51.

37. Olabi AA, Lawless HT, Hunter JB, Levitsky DA, et al. The effect of microgravity and space
flight on the chemical senses. J Food Sci. 2002 Mar;67(2):468-78.

38. Baranski S, Kubiczkowa J, Piorko A, Skibniewski F, et al. Electrogustometric investigations
during manned space flight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1983 Jan;54(1):1-5.

"
"99","39. Seddon MR, Fettman MJ, Phillips RW. Practical and clinical nutritional concerns during
spaceflight. Am J Clin Nutr. 1994 Nov;60(5):825S—3OS.

40. Watt DG, Money KE, Bondar RL, Thirsk RB, et al. Canadian medical experiments on Shuttle
flight 41 -G. Can Aeronaut Space J. 1985 Sep;31(3):215-26.

41. Budylina SM, Khvatova VA, Volozhin AI. Effect of orthostatic and antiorthostatic hypokinesia
on taste sensitivity in men. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med. 1976;10:27-30.

42. Kurliandskii V, Khvatova VA, Budylina SM. [Functional mobility of taste receptors of the
tongue under conditions of prolonged hypodynamia]. Stomatologiia (Mosk). 1974 Nov-
Dec;53(6):13-5.

43. Rice BL, Vickers ZM, Rose MS, Lane HW, editors. Fluid shifts during head-down bed rest
do not influence flavor sensitivity. 67th Annual Scientific Meeting of the Aerospace Medical
Association; 1996 May 5-9; Atlanta, GA.

44. Lane HW, LeBlanc AD, Putcha L, Whitson PA. Nutrition and human physiological adaptations
to space flight. Am J Clin Nutr. 1993;58:583-8.

45. Smirnov KV, Ugolev AM. Digestion and absorption. In: Leach Huntoon CL, Antipov VV,
Grigoriev AI, editors. Space biology and medicine. Vol. III, Book 1, Humans in spaceflight.
Reston, VA: American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics; 1996. p. 211-30.

46. Heer M, Paloski WH. Space motion sickness: incidence, etiology, and countermeasures.
Auton Neurosci. 2006 Oct 30;129(1-2):77-9.

47. Reschke MF, Bloomberg JJ, Harm DL, Paloski WH. Space flight and neurovestibular
adaptation. J Clin Pharmacol. 1994 Jun;34(6):609-17.

48. Lackner JR, Dizio P. Space motion sickness. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Nov;175(3):377-99.

49. Nicogossian A. Medicine and space exploration. Lancet. 2003 Dec;362 Suppl:38-9.

50. Smith SM, Zwart SR, Heer MA, Hudson EK, Shackelford LC, Morgan JLL. Men and women
in space: bone loss and kidney stone risk after Iong-duration space flight. J Bone Miner Res
29:1639-45, 2014.

51. Lane HW, Schulz LO. Nutritional questions relevant to space flight. Annu Rev Nutr.
1992;12:257-78.

52. Leonard JI, Leach CS, Rambaut PC. Quantitation of tissue loss during prolonged space flight.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1983;38:667-79.

53. LaChance PA, Berry CA. Luncheon in space. Nutr Today 1967 June:2-11.

54. Leach CS. Medical results from STS 1-4: analysis of body fluids. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1983;54(12 Suppl):S50—4.

55. Smith SM, Wastney ME, Morukov BV, Larina IM, et al. Calcium metabolism before, during,
and after a 3-mo spaceflight: kinetic and biochemical changes. Am J Physiol. 1999 Ju|;277(1
Pt 2):R1-10.

56. Lane HW, Kloeris V, Perchonok M, Zwart S, et al. Food and nutrition for the moon base:
what have we learned in 45 years of spaceflight. Nutr Today. 2007;42(3):1 02-10.

57. Brozek J, Grande F, Taylor HL, Anderson JT, et al. Changes in body weight and body
dimensions in men performing work on a low calorie carbohydrate diet. J Appl Physiol.
1957;10(3):412-20.

58. Faintuch J, Soriano FG, Ladeira JP, Janiszewski M, et al. Changes in body fluid and
energy compartments during prolonged hunger strike. Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo.
2000;55(2):47-54.

59. Johnson PC, Driscoll TB, Alexander WC, Lambertsen CJ. Body fluid volume changes during
a 14-day continuous exposure to 5.2% 02 in N2 at pressure equivalent to 100 FSW (4 ata).
Aerosp Med. 1973;44:860—3.

"
"100","60. Stein TP, Leskiw MJ, Schluter MD, Donaldson MR, et al. Protein kinetics during and after
Iong-duration spaceflight on MIR. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 1999;276:E1014-21.

61. Biolo G, Ciocchi B, Stulle M, Bosutti A, et al. Calorie restriction accelerates the catabolism
of lean body mass during 2 wk of bed rest. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007 Aug;86(2):366-72.

62. Wade CE, Miller MM, Baer LA, Moran MM, et al. Body mass, energy intake, and water
consumption of rats and humans during space flight. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):829-36.

63. Florian J, Curren M, Baisch F, Pawelczyk J. Caloric restriction decreases orthostatic tolerance.
FASEB J. 2004;18:478.6.

64. Blanc S, Somody L, Gharib C. Are energy metabolism alterations involved in cardiovascular
deconditioning after weightlessness? An hypothesis. Pflugers Arch. 2000;441(2-3
Suppl):R39-47.

65. Ferrando AA, Paddon-Jones D, Wolfe RR. Alterations in protein metabolism during space
flight and inactivity. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):837-41.

66. |h|e R, Loucks AB. Dose-response relationships between energy availability and bone
turnover in young exercising women. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Aug;19(8):1231-40.

67. Baek K, Barlow AA, Allen MR, Bloomfield SA. Food restriction and simulated microgravity:
effects on bone and serum leptin. J Appl Physiol. 2008 Apr;104(4):1086-93.

68. Oritsland NA. Starvation survival and body composition in mammals with particular reference
to Homo sapiens. Bull Math Biol. 1990;52(5):643-55.

69. Korcok M. Hunger strikers may have died of fat, not protein, loss. JAMA. 1981 Oct 23-
30;246(17):1878-9.

70. Leiter LA, Marliss EB. Survival during fasting may depend on fat as well as protein stores.
JAMA. 1982 Nov 12;248(18):2306-7.

71. Phillips WJ. Starvation and survival: some military considerations. Mil Med. 1994
Ju|;159(7):513-6.

72. Biolo G, Agostini F, Simunic B, Sturma M, et al. Positive energy balance is associated with
accelerated muscle atrophy and increased erythrocyte glutathione turnover during 5 wk of
bed rest. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Oct;88(4):950-8.

73. Blanc S, Normand S, Pachiaudi C, Fortrat JO, et al. Fuel homeostasis during physical
inactivity induced by bed rest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jun;85(6):2223-33.

74. Stein TP, Schluter MD, Galante AT, Soteropoulos P, et al. Effect of hind limb muscle unloading
on liver metabolism of rats. J Nutr Biochem. 2005 Jan;16(1):9-16.

75. Stein TP, Wade CE. Metabolic consequences of muscle disuse atrophy. J Nutr. 2005
Ju|;135(7):1824S-8S.

76. Zahariev A, Bergouignan A, Caloin M, Normand S, et al. Skinfold thickness versus isotope
dilution for body fat assessment during simulated microgravity: results from three bed-rest
campaigns in men and women with and without countermeasures. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2005
Oct;95(4):344-50.

77. Levine DS, Greenleaf JE. Immunosuppression during spaceflight deconditioning. Aviat Space
Environ Med. 1998;69:172-7.

78. Stubbs RJ, Harbron CG, Murgatroyd PR, Prentice AM. Covert manipulation of dietary fat and
energy density: effect on substrate flux and food intake in men eating ad libitum. Am J Clin
Nutr. 1995 Aug;62(2):316-29.

79. MaaB H, Raabe W, Wegmann HM. Effects of microgravity on glucose tolerance. In: Sahm
PR, Keller MH, Schiewe B, editors. Proceedings of the Norderney Symposium on Scientific
Results of the German Spacelab Mission D-2. Norderney, Germany: Wissenschaftliche
Projecthhrung D-2; 1995. p. 732-5.

"
"101","80. Smirnov KV, Rubinova LG, Afonin BV, Noskov VB, et al. [Functional carbohydrate test during
237-day space flight]. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med. 1991 May-Jun;25(3):61-2.

81. Alexandrov A, Gharib C, Grigoriev AI, GUeII A, et al. [Oral glucose tolerance tests in
man during a space flight of 150 days (Salyut 7-Soyuz T9)]. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil.
1985;179:192-5.

82. Biolo G, Ciocchi B, Stulle M, Piccoli A, et al. Metabolic consequences of physical inactivity.
J Ren Nutr. 2005 Jan;15(1):49-53.

83. Vernikos—Danellis J, Leach CS, Winget CM, Goodwin AL, et al. Changes in glucose, insulin,
and growth hormone levels associated with bedrest. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1976
Jun;47(6):583-7.

84. Stuart CA, Shangraw RE, Prince MJ, Peters EJ, et al. Bed-rest-induced insulin resistance
occurs primarily in muscle. Metabolism. 1988 Aug;37(8):802-6.

85. Stein TP, Schulter MD, Boden G. Development of insulin resistance by astronauts during
spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1994 Dec;65(12):1091-6.

86. Lane HW, Rambaut PC. Nutrition. In: Nicogossian AE, Huntoon CL, Pool SL, editors. Space
physiology and medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1994. p. 305-16.

87. Zerwekh JE, Odvina CV, Wuermser LA, Pak CY. Reduction of renal stone risk by potassium-
magnesium Citrate during 5 weeks of bed rest. J Urol. 2007 Jun;177(6):2179-84.

88. Pietrzyk RA, Jones JA, Sams CF, Whitson PA. Renal stone formation among astronauts.
Aviat Space Environ Med. 2007 Apr;78(4 Suppl):A9-13.

89. Pietrzyk RA, Feiveson AH, Whitson PA. Mathematical model to estimate risk of calcium-
containing renal stones. Miner Electrolyte Metab. 1999 May-Jun;25(3):199-203.

90. Dolkas CB, Greenleaf JE. Insulin and glucose responses during bed rest with isotonic and
isometric exercise. J Appl Physiol. 1977 Dec;43(6):1033-8.

91. Lipman RL, Ulvedal F, Schnure JJ, Bradley EM, et al. GIuco-regulatory hormone response
to 2-deoxy-d-glucose infusion in normal subjects at bedrest. Metabolism. 1970
Nov;19(11):980-7.

92. Paulsrud JR, Pensler L, Whitten CF, Stewart S, et al. Essential fatty acid deficiency in infants
induced by fat-free intravenous feeding. Am J Clin Nutr. 1972 Sep;25(9):897-904.

93. Holman RT. Polyunsaturated fatty acid profiles in human disease. In: Bazan NG, Paoletti R,
Iacono JM, editors. New trends in nutrition, lipid research and cardiovascular diseases.
New York: Alan R. Liss; 1981. p. 25-42.

94. Ritz P, Acheson KJ, Gachon P, Vico L, et al. Energy and substrate metabolism during a 42-
day bed-rest in a head-down tilt position in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1998
Sep;78(4):308-14.

95. Mazzucco S, Agostini F, Biolo G. Inactivity-mediated insulin resistance is associated
with upregulated pro-inflammatory fatty acids in human cell membranes. Clin Nutr. 2010
Jun;29(3):386-90.

96. Macho L, Koska J, Ksinantova L, Pacak K, et al. The response of endocrine system to stress
loads during space flight in human subject. Adv Space Res. 2003;31(6):1605-10.

97. Stein TP, Schluter MD, Moldawer LL. Endocrine relationships during human spaceflight.

Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jan;276(1 Pt 1):E155-62.

98. Davidson LA, Nguyen DV, Hokanson RM, Callaway ES, et al. Chemopreventive n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids reprogram genetic signatures during colon cancer initiation
and progression in the rat. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6797-804.

99. Turner ND, Braby LA, Ford J, Lupton JR. Opportunities for nutritional amelioration
of radiation-induced cellular damage. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):904-12.

"
"102","100. Chapkin RS, Davidson LA, Ly L, Weeks BR, et al. Immunomodulatory effects of (n-3) fatty
acids: putative link to inflammation and colon cancer. J Nutr. 2007 Jan;137(1):200$-4S.

101. Hong MY, Bancroft LK, Turner ND, Davidson LA, et al. Fish oil decreases oxidative DNA
damage by enhancing apoptosis in rat colon. Nutr Cancer. 2005;52(2):166-75.

102. Sanders LM, Henderson CE, Hong MY, Barhoumi R, et al. An increase in reactive oxygen
species by dietary fish oil coupled with the attenuation of antioxidant defenses by dietary
pectin enhances rat colonocyte apoptosis. J Nutr. 2004 Dec;134(12):3233-8.

103. Tisdale MJ. Molecular pathways leading to cancer cachexia. Physiology (Bethesda).
2005 Oct;20:340-8.

104. Whitehouse AS, Tisdale MJ. Downregulation of ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis by
eicosapentaenoic acid in acute starvation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul
20;285(3):598-602.

105. Whitehouse AS, Smith HJ, Drake JL, Tisdale MJ. Mechanism of attenuation of skeletal
muscle protein catabolism in cancer cachexia by eicosapentaenoic acid. Cancer Res.
2001 May 1;61(9):3604-9.

106. Tisdale MJ. Loss of skeletal muscle in cancer: biochemical mechanisms. Front Biosci.
2001 Feb 1;6:D164-74.

107. Tisdale MJ. Cancer anorexia and cachexia. Nutrition. 2001 May;17(5):438-42.

108. Wigmore SJ, Barber MD, Ross JA, Tisdale MJ, et al. Effect of oral eicosapentaenoic acid
on weight loss in patients with pancreatic cancer. Nutr Cancer. 2000;36(2):177-84.

109. Smith HJ, Lorite MJ, Tisdale MJ. Effect of a cancer cachectic factor on protein synthesis/
degradation in murine C2C12 myoblasts: modulation by eicosapentaenoic acid. Cancer Res.
1999 Nov 1;59(21):5507-13.

110. Wigmore SJ, Ross JA, Falconer JS, Plester CE, et al. The effect of polyunsaturated
fatty acids on the progress of cachexia in patients with pancreatic cancer. Nutrition.

1996 Jan;12(1 Suppl):S27-30.

111. Bayram I, Erbey F, Celik N, Nelson JL, et al. The use of a protein and energy dense
eicosapentaenoic acid containing supplement for malignancy-related weight loss in children.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Dec 17.

112. Tisdale MJ. Mechanisms of cancer cachexia. Physiol Rev. 2009 Apr;89(2):381-410.

113. Griel AE, Kris—Etherton PM, Hilpert KF, Zhao G, et al. An increase in dietary n-3 fatty acids
decreases a marker of bone resorption in humans. Nutr J. 2007;6:2-10.

114. Orchard TS, Ing SW, Lu B, Belury MA, et al. The association of red blood cell n-3 and n-6
fatty acids with bone mineral density and hip fracture risk in the women's health initiative.
J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Mar;28(3):505-15.

115. Mangano K, Kerstetter J, Kenny A, Insogna K, et al. An investigation of the association
between omega 3 FA and bone mineral density among older adults: results from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey years 2005-2008. Osteoporos Int.
2014 Mar;25(3):1033-41.

116. Zwart SR, Pierson D, Mehta S, Gonda S, et al. Capacity of omega—3 fatty acids or
eicosapentaenoic acid to counteract weightlessness-induced bone loss by inhibiting
NF-kappaB activation: from cells to bed rest to astronauts. J Bone Miner Res.
2010;25(5):1049-57.

117. Orchard TS, Cauley JA, Frank GC, Neuhouser ML, et al. Fatty acid consumption and risk
of fracture in the Women's Health Initiative. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010 Dec;92(6):1452-60.

118. Terano T. Effect of omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid ingestion on bone metabolism
and osteoporosis. World Rev Nutr Diet. 2001;88:141-7.

"
"103","119. Rousseau JH, Kleppinger A, Kenny AM. SeIf-reported dietary intake of omega—3 fatty
acids and association with bone and lower extremity function. J Am Geriatric Soc. 2009
Oct;57(10):1781-8.

120. Rizos EC, Ntzani EE, Bika E, Kostapanos MS, et al. Association between omega—3 fatty acid
supplementation and risk of major cardiovascular disease events: a systematic review and
meta—analysis. JAMA. 2012 Sep 12;308(10):1024-33.

121. Andreeva VA, Touvier M, Kesse-Guyot E, Julia C, et al. B vitamin and/or omega—3 fatty
acid supplementation and cancer: ancillary findings from the supplementation with folate,
vitamins B6 and B12, and/or omega—3 fatty acids (SU.FOL.OM3) randomized trial. Arch Intern
Med. 2012 Apr 9;172(7):540-7.

122. Bassey EJ, Littlewood JJ, Rothwell MC, Pye DW. Lack of effect of supplementation with
essential fatty acids on bone mineral density in healthy pre- and postmenopausal women:
two randomized controlled trials of Efacal v. calcium alone. Br J Nutr. 2000 Jun;83(6):629-35.

123. Silber T. Anorexia nervosa: morbidity and mortality. Pediatr Ann. 1984 Nov;13(11):851, 5-9.

124. Garrow TS, Fletcher K, Halliday 0. Body composition in severe infantile malnutrition.

J Clin Invest. 1965;44:417-25.

125. Kerstetter JE, Caseria DM, Mitnick ME, Ellison AF, et al. Increased circulating concentrations
of parathyroid hormone in healthy, young women consuming a protein-restricted diet.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Nov;66(5):1188-96.

126. Kerstetter JE, O'Brien KO, Insogna KL. Dietary protein affects intestinal calcium absorption.
Am J Clin Nutr. 1998 Oct;68(4):859-65.

127. Freudenheim JL, Johnson NE, Smith EL. Relationships between usual nutrient intake
and bone-mineral content of women 35-65 years of age: longitudinal and cross-sectional
analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 1986 Dec;44(6):863-76.

128. Promislow JH, Goodman-Gruen D, Slymen DJ, Barrett-Connor E. Protein consumption
and bone mineral density in the elderly: the Rancho Bernardo Study. Am J Epidemiol.

2002 Apr 1 ;155(7):636-44.

129. Stein TP, Schluter MD. Plasma protein synthesis after spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med.
2006 Ju|;77(7):745-8.

130. Rodriguez NR, DiMarco NM, Langley S. Position of the American Dietetic Association,
Dietitians of Canada, and the American College of Sports Medicine: nutrition and athletic
performance. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009 Mar;109(3):509-27.

131. McCormick DB. Vitamin B6. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in
nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: ILSI Press; 2006. p. 269-77.

132. Kraemer WJ, Staron RS, Gordon SE, Volek JS, et al. The effects of 10 days of spaceflight on
the shuttle Endeavor on predominantly fast-twitch muscles in the rat. Histochem Cell Biol.
2000 Nov;114(5):349-55.

133. Coburn SP, Lewis DL, Fink WJ, Mahuren JD, et al. Human vitamin B-6 pools estimated
through muscle biopsies. Am J Clin Nutr. 1988 Aug;48(2):291-4.

134. Zwart SR, Crawford GE, Gillman PL, Kala G, et al. Effects of 21 days of bed rest,
with or without artificial gravity, on nutritional status of humans. J Appl Physiol.

2009 Ju|;107(1):54-62.

135. Coburn SP, Thampy KG, Lane HW, Conn PS, et al. Pyridoxic acid excretion during low
vitamin B-6 intake, total fasting, and bed rest. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995;62(5):979-83.

136. Hvas AM, Juul S, Bech P, Nexo E. Vitamin B6 level is associated with symptoms of
depression. Psychother Psychosom. 2004 Nov-Dec;73(6):340-3.

137. Bassler KH. Use and abuse of high dosages of vitamin B6. Int J Vitam Nutr Res Suppl.
1989;30:120-6.

"
"104","138. Gdynia HJ, Muller T, Sperfeld AD, Kuhnlein P, et al. Severe sensorimotor neuropathy after
intake of highest dosages of vitamin B6. Neuromuscul Disord. 2008 Feb;18(2):156-8.

139. Katan MB. [How much vitamin B6 is toxic?]. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2005 Nov
12;149(46):2545-6.

140. Zwart SR, Gibson CR, Mader TH, Ericson K, et al. Vision changes after spaceflight are
related to alterations in folate- and vitamin B-12-dependent one-carbon metabolism.

J Nutr. 2012 Mar;142(3):427-31.

141. Fitts RH, Riley DR, Widrick JJ. Invited review: microgravity and skeletal muscle.
J Appl Physiol. 2000 Aug;89(2):823-39.

142. Adams GR, Caiozzo VJ, Baldwin KM. Skeletal muscle unweighting: spaceflight and
ground-based models. J Appl Physiol. 2003 Dec;95(6):2185-201.

143. LeBlanc A, Rowe R, Schneider V, Evans H, et al. Regional muscle loss after short duration
spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1995;66:1151-4.

144. Desplanches D. Structural and functional adaptations of skeletal muscle to weightlessness.
Int J Sports Med. 1997 Oct;18 Suppl 4:S259-64.

145. Grogor'eva LS, Kozlovskaia IB. [Effect of weightlessness and hypokinesia on the
velocity-strength properties of human muscles]. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med.

1987 Jan-Feb;21(1):27-30.

146. Tesch PA, Berg HE, Bring D, Evans HJ, et al. Effects of 17-day spaceflight on knee extensor
muscle function and size. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2005 Jan;93(4):463-8.

147. Gopalakrishnan R, Genc KO, Rice AJ, Lee SM, et al. Muscle volume, strength, endurance,
and exercise loads during 6-month missions in space. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2010
Feb;81(2):91-102.

148. Michel EL, Rummel JA, Sawin CF, Buderer MC, et al. Results of Skylab medical experiment
M-171 - Metabolic Activity. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical results from
Skylab (NASA SP-377). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration;
1977. p. 372-87.

149. Antonutto G, Capelli C, Girardis M, Zamparo P, et al. Effects of microgravity on maximal
power of lower limbs during very short efforts in humans. J Appl Physiol. 1999 Jan;86(1):
85-92.

150. Zange J, Muller K, Schuber M, Wackerhage H, et al. Changes in calf muscle performance,
energy metabolism, and muscle volume caused by Iong-term stay on space station MIR.
Int J Sports Med. 1997 Oct;18 Suppl 4:S308-9.

151. Bajotto G, Shimomura Y. Determinants of disuse-induced skeletal muscle atrophy:
exercise and nutrition countermeasures to prevent protein loss. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo).
2006 Aug;52(4):233-47.

152. Narici MV, de Boer MD. Disuse of the musculo-skeletal system in space and on earth.

Eur J Appl Physiol. 2011 Mar;111(3):403-20.

153. Convertino VA. Physiological adaptations to weightlessness: effects on exercise and work
performance. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 1990;18:119-66.

154. Baldwin KM. Effect of spaceflight on the functional, biochemical, and metabolic properties
of skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996 Aug;28(8):983-7.

155. Bodine SC. Disuse-induced muscle wasting. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;45(10):
2200-8.

156. Stein TP. Nutrition and muscle loss in humans during spaceflight. Adv Space Biol Med.
1999;7:49-97.

157. Cirillo M, De Santo NG, Heer M, Norsk P, et al. Urinary albumin in space missions.

J Gravit Physiol. 2002 Ju|;9(1):P193-4.

"
"105","158. Cirillo M, De Santo NG, Heer M, Norsk P, et al. Low urinary albumin excretion in astronauts
during space missions. Nephron Physiol. 2003;93(4):p102-5.

159. Cirillo M, Stellato D, Heer M, Drummer C, et al. Urinary albumin in head-down bed rest.

J Gravit Physiol. 2002 Ju|;9(1):P195-6.

160. Whedon GD, Lutwak L, Rambaut PC, Whittle MW, et al. Mineral and nitrogen metabolic
studies, experiment M071. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical results from
Skylab (NASA SP-377). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration;
1977. p. 164-74.

161. Thornton WE, Rummel JA. Muscle deconditioning and its prevention in space flight.

In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical results from Skylab (NASA SP-377).
Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1977. p. 191-7.

162. Stein TP, Leskiw MJ, Schluter MD. Diet and nitrogen metabolism during spaceflight on
the shuttle. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1996 Ju|;81(1):82-97.

163. Ushakov AS, Vlasova TF. Free amino acids in human blood plasma during space flights.
Aviat Space Environ Med. 1976 Oct;47(10):1061-4.

164. Ushakov AS, Vlasova TF. Amino acid spectrum of human blood plasma during space flight
and in antiorthostatic hypokinesia. Life Sci Space Res. 1976;14:257-62.

165. Stein TP, Schluter MD. Plasma amino acids during human spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ
Med. 1999 Mar;70(3 Pt 1):250-5.

166. Leach CS, Rambaut PC, Di Ferrante N. Amino aciduria in weightlessness. Acta Astronaut.
1979;6:1323-33.

167. Smith GI, Patterson BW, Mittendorfer B. Human muscle protein turnover—-why is it so
variable? J Appl Physiol. 2011 Feb;110(2):480-91.

168. Stein TP, Leskiw MJ, Schluter MD. Effect of spaceflight on human protein metabolism.

Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 1993;264:E824-8.

169. Stein TP. Protein and muscle homeostasis: the role of nutrition. In: Lane HW, Schoeller DA,
editors. Nutrition in spaceflight and weightlessness models. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press;
2000. p. 141-77.

170. Navasiolava NM, Custaud MA, Tomilovskaya ES, Larina IM, et al. Long-term dry immersion:
review and prospects. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2011 Ju|;111(7):1235-60.

171. Biolo G, Ciocchi B, Lebenstedt M, Barazzoni R, et al. Short-term bed rest impairs amino
acid-induced protein anabolism in humans. J Physiol. 2004 Jul 15;558(Pt 2):381-8.

172. Biolo G, Ciocchi B, Lebenstedt M, Heer M, et al. Sensitivity of whole body protein
synthesis to amino acid administration during short-term bed rest. J Gravit Physiol.

2002 Ju|;9(1):P197-8.

173. Drummond MJ, Dickinson JM, Fry CS, Walker DK, et al. Bed rest impairs skeletal
muscle amino acid transporter expression, mTORC1 signaling, and protein synthesis
in response to essential amino acids in older adults. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.

2012 May;302(9):E1113-22.

174. Ferrando AA, Lane HW, Stuart CA, Davis-Street J, et al. Prolonged bed rest decreases
skeletal muscle and whole body protein synthesis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
1996 Apr;270(4 Pt 1):E627-E33.

175. Ferrando AA, Tipton KD, Bamman MM, Wolfe RR. Resistance exercise maintains skeletal
muscle protein synthesis during bed rest. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1997 Mar;82(3):807-10.

176. Stuart CA, Shangraw RE, Peters EJ, Wolfe RR. Effect of dietary protein on bed-rest-related
changes in whole—body-protein synthesis. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990 Sep;52(3):509-14.

177. Symons TB, SheffieId-Moore M, Chinkes DL, Ferrando AA, et al. Artificial gravity maintains
skeletal muscle protein synthesis during 21 days of simulated microgravity. J Appl Physiol.
2009 Ju|;107(1):34-8.

"
"106","178. Glover El, Phillips SM, Oates BR, Tang JE, et al. Immobilization induces anabolic resistance
in human myofibrillar protein synthesis with low and high dose amino acid infusion.
J Physiol. 2008 Dec 15;586(Pt 24):6049-61.

179. Blanc S, Normand S, Ritz P, Pachiaudi C, et al. Energy and water metabolism, body
composition, and hormonal changes induced by 42 days of enforced inactivity and
simulated weightlessness. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Dec;83(12):4289-97.

180. Rambaut PC, Leach CS, Whedon GD. A study of metabolic balance in crewmembers
of Skylab IV. Acta Astronaut. 1979 Oct;6(10):1313-22.

181. Heer M, De Santo NG, Cirillo M, Drummer C. Body mass changes, energy, and protein
metabolism in space. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Sep;38(3):691-5.

182. Drummond MJ, Timmerman KL, Markofski MM, Walker DK, et al. Short-term bed rest
increases TLR4 and |L-6 expression in skeletal muscle of older adults. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol. 2013 Aug;305(3):R216-23.

183. Bosutti A, Malaponte G, Zanetti M, Castellino P, et al. Calorie restriction modulates
inactivity-induced changes in the inflammatory markers C-reactive protein and pentraxin-3.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;93(8):3226-9.

184. Millet C, Custaud MA, Maillet A, Allevard AM, et al. Endocrine responses to 7 days of head-
down bed rest and orthostatic tests in men and women. Clin Physiol. 2001 Mar;21(2):172-83.

185. Paddon-Jones D, SheffieId-Moore M, Cree MG, Hewlings SJ, et al. Atrophy and impaired
muscle protein synthesis during prolonged inactivity and stress. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2006 Dec;91(12):4836-41.

186. Paddon-Jones D, SheffieId-Moore M, Urban RJ, Aarsland A, et al. The catabolic effects
of prolonged inactivity and acute hypercortisolemia are offset by dietary supplementation.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Mar;90(3):1453-9.

187. Fitts RH, Romatowski JG, Peters JR, Paddon-Jones D, et al. The deleterious effects of bed
rest on human skeletal muscle fibers are exacerbated by hypercortisolemia and ameliorated
by dietary supplementation. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Ju|;293(1):C313-20.

188. Baldwin KM. Future research directions in seeking countermeasures to weightlessness.

J Gravit Physiol. 1995;2(1):P51-3.

189. di Prampero PE, Narici MV. Muscles in microgravity: from fibres to human motion.
J Biomech. 2003 Mar;36(3):403-12.

190. Trappe S, Costill D, Gallagher P, Creer A, et al. Exercise in space: human skeletal muscle
after 6 months aboard the International Space Station. J Appl Physiol. 2009 Apr;106(4):
1159-68.

191. LeBlanc A, Lin C, Rowe R, Belichenko O, et al. Muscle loss after long duration spaceflight
on Mir 18/STS—71 [abstract]. AIAA Life Sciences and Space Medicine Conference;1996.

p. 53-4, Abstract 96-LS—71.

192. Shackelford LC, LeBlanc AD, Driscoll TB, Evans HJ, et al. Resistance exercise as a
countermeasure to disuse-induced bone loss. J Appl Physiol. 2004 July;97(1):119-29.

193. Tesch PA, Ekberg A, Lindquist DM, Trieschmann JT. Muscle hypertrophy following 5-week
resistance training using a non-gravity-dependent exercise system. Acta Physiol Scand.
2004 Jan;180(1):89-98.

194. Alkner BA, Berg HE, Kozlovskaya I, Sayenko D, et al. Effects of strength training, using a
gravity-independent exercise system, performed during 110 days of simulated space station
confinement. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2003 Sep;90(1-2):44-9.

195. Alkner BA, Tesch PA. Knee extensor and plantar flexor muscle size and function
following 90 days of bed rest with or without resistance exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol.

2004 Dec;93(3):294-305.

"
"107","196. Reeves ND, Maganaris CN, Ferretti G, Narici MV. Influence of 90-day simulated microgravity
on human tendon mechanical properties and the effect of resistive countermeasures.
J Appl Physiol. 2005 Jun;98(6):2278-86.

197. Rittweger J, Felsenberg D, Maganaris C, Ferretti JL. Vertical jump performance after 90 days
bed rest with and without flywheel resistive exercise, including a 180 days follow-up.
Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007 Ju|;100(4):427-36.

198. Milesi S, Capelli C, Denoth J, Hutchinson T, et al. Effects of 17 days bed rest on the
maximal isometric torque of the flexors and extensors of the ankle. J Gravit Physiol.
1997 Ju|;4(2):P125-6.

199. Schwandt DF, Whalen RT, Watenpaugh DE, Parazynski SE, et al. Development of exercise
devices to minimize musculoskeletal and cardiovascular deconditioning in microgravity.
Physiologist. 1991 ;34 Suppl 1:S189-90.

200. Greenleaf JE, Bulbulian R, Bernauer EM, Haskell WL, et al. Exercise-training protocols
for astronauts in microgravity. J Appl Physiol. 1989;67(6):2191-204.

201. Macias BR, Groppo ER, Eastlack RK, Watenpaugh DE, et al. Space exercise and Earth
benefits. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;6(4):305-17.

202. Hawkey A. The importance of exercising in space. Interdiscip Sci Rev. 2003 Jun;28(2):130-8.

203. Krainski F, Hastings JL, Heinicke K, Romain N, et al. The Effect of Rowing Ergometry and
Resistive Exercise on Skeletal Muscle Structure and Function during Bed Rest. J Appl
Physiol. 2014 May 1.

204. Lee SM, Schneider SM, Feiveson AH, Macias BR, et al. WISE-2005: Countermeasures to
prevent muscle deconditioning during bed rest in women. J Appl Physiol. 2014 Jan 23.

205. PIoutz-Snyder LL, Downs M, Ryder J, Hackney K, et al. Integrated resistance and aerobic
exercise protects fitness during bed rest. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014 Feb;46(2):358-68.

206. Belavy DL, Hides JA, Wilson SJ, Stanton W, et al. Resistive simulated weightbearing exercise
with whole body vibration reduces lumbar spine deconditioning in bed-rest. Spine. 2008 Mar
1;33(5):E121-31.

207. Rubin C, Recker R, Cullen D, Ryaby J, et al. Prevention of postmenopausal bone loss by
a Iow-magnitude, high-frequency mechanical stimuli: a clinical trial assessing compliance,
efficacy, and safety. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Mar;19(3):343-51.

208. Bleeker MW, De Groot PC, Rongen GA, Rittweger J, et al. Vascular adaptation to
deconditioning and the effect of an exercise countermeasure: results of the Berlin
Bed Rest study. J Appl Physiol. 2005 Oct;99(4):1293-300.

209. Zange J, Mester J, Heer M, Kluge G, et al. 20-Hz whole body vibration training fails to
counteract the decrease in leg muscle volume caused by 14 days of 6 degrees head
down tilt bed rest. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2009 Jan;105(2):271-7.

210. Belavy DL, Armbrecht G, Gast U, Richardson CA, et al. Countermeasures against lumbar
spine deconditioning in prolonged bed rest: resistive exercise with and without whole body
vibration. J Appl Physiol. 2010 Dec;109(6):1801-11.

211. Mikhael M, Orr R, Fiatarone Singh MA. The effect of whole body vibration exposure on
muscle or bone morphology and function in older adults: a systematic review of the
literature. Maturitas. 2010 Jun;66(2):150-7.

212. Prisby RD, Lafage-Proust MH, Malaval L, Belli A, et al. Effects of whole body vibration on
the skeleton and other organ systems in man and animal models: what we know and what
we need to know. Ageing Res Rev. 2008 Dec;7(4):319-29.

213. Rittweger J, Belavy D, Hunek P, Gast U, et al. Highly demanding resistive vibration exercise
program is tolerated during 56 days of strict bed-rest. Int J Sports Med. 2006 Ju|;27(7):
553-9.

214. Frost HM. Bone ""mass"" and the ""mechanostat"": a proposal. Anat Rec. 1987 Sep;219(1):1-9.

"
"108","215. Frost HM. Bone's mechanostat: a 2003 update. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol.
2003 Dec;275(2):1081-101.

216. Baecker N, Frings—Meuthen P, Heer M, Mester J, et al. Effects of vibration training on
bone metabolism: results from a short-term bed rest study. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012
May;112(5):1741-50.

217. Armbrecht G, Belavy DL, Gast U, Bongrazio M, et al. Resistive vibration exercise attenuates
bone and muscle atrophy in 56 days of bed rest: biochemical markers of bone metabolism.
Osteoporos Int. 2010 Apr;21(4):597-607.

218. Belavy DL, Beller G, Ritter Z, Felsenberg D. Bone structure and density via HR-pQCT in 60d
bed-rest, 2-years recovery with and without countermeasures. J Musculoskelet Neuronal
Interact. 2011 Sep;11(3):215-26.

219. Belavy DL, Miokovic T, Armbrecht G, Rittweger J, et al. Resistive vibration exercise reduces
lower limb muscle atrophy during 56-day bed-rest. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2009
Oct-Dec;9(4):225-35.

220. Trudel G, Coletta E, Cameron I, Belavy DL, et al. Resistive exercises, with or without whole
body vibration, prevent vertebral marrow fat accumulation during 60 days of head-down tilt
bed rest in men. J Appl Physiol. 2012 Jun;112(11):1824-31.

221. Wimalawansa SM, Chapa MT, Wei JN, Westlund KN, et al. Reversal of weightlessness-
induced musculoskeletal losses with androgens: quantification by MRI. J Appl Physiol.
1999 Jun;86(6):1841-6.

222. Wimalawansa SM, Wimalawansa SJ. Simulated weightlessness-induced attenuation of
testosterone production may be responsible for bone loss. Endocrine. 1999 Jun;10(3):
253-60.

223. Strollo F, Boitani C, Basciani S, Pecorelli L, et al. The pituitary-testicular axis in microgravity:
analogies with the aging male syndrome. J Endocrinol Invest. 2005;28(11 Suppl
Proceedings):78-83.

224. Strollo F. Hormonal changes in humans during spaceflight. Adv Space Biol Med. 1999;7:
99-129.

225. Strollo F, Barger L, Fuller C. Testosterone urinary excretion rate increases during hypergravity
in male monkeys. J Gravit Physiol. 2000 Ju|;7(2):P181-2.

226. Strollo F, Masini MA, Pastorino M, Ricci F, et al. Microgravity-induced alterations in cultured
testicular cells. J Gravit Physiol. 2004 Ju|;11(2):P187-8.

227. Strollo F, Riondino G, Harris B, Strollo G, et al. The effect of microgravity on testicular
androgen secretion. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1998 Feb;69(2):133-6.

228. Strollo F, Strollo G, More M, Ferretti C, et al. Changes in human adrenal and gonadal function
onboard Spacelab. J Gravit Physiol. 1997 Ju|;4(2):P103-4.

229. Strollo F, Strollo G, More M, Mangrossa N, et al. Space flight induces endocrine changes
at both the pituitary and peripheral level in the absence of any major chronobiologic
disturbances. In: Sahm PR, Keller MH, Schiewe B, editors. Proceedings of the Norderney
Symposium on Scientific Results of the German Spacelab Mission D-2. Norderney,
Germany: Wissenschaftliche Projecthhrung D-2; 1995. p. 743-7.

230. Strollo F, Strollo G, More M, Bollanti L, et al. Hormonal adaptation to real and simulated
microgravity. J Gravitational Physiol. 1998 Ju|;5(1):P89-P92.

231. Wade CE, Stanford KI, Stein TP, Greenleaf JE. Intensive exercise training suppresses
testosterone during bed rest. J Appl Physiol. 2005 Ju|;99(1):59-63.

232. Space Science Board. Endocrinology. Life beyond the Earth's environment: the biology of
living organisms in space. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences; 1979. p. 65.

233. Strollo F, Norsk P, Roecker L, Strollo G, et al. Indirect evidence of CNS adrenergic pathways
activation during spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1998 Aug;69(8):777-80.

"
"109","234. Alemany JA, Nindl BC, Kellogg MD, Tharion WJ, et al. Effects of dietary protein content
on IGF-I, testosterone, and body composition during 8 days of severe energy deficit and
arduous physical activity. J Appl Physiol. 2008 Ju|;105(1):58-64.

235. Kyrolainen H, Karinkanta J, Santtila M, Koski H, et al. Hormonal responses during a
prolonged military field exercise with variable exercise intensity. Eur J Appl Physiol.
2008 Mar;102(5):539-46.

236. Cangemi R, Friedmann AJ, Holloszy JO, Fontana L. Long-term effects of calorie restriction
on serum sex-hormone concentrations in men. Aging Cell. 2010 Apr;9(2):236-42.

237. Smith SM, Heer M, Wang Z, Huntoon CL, et al. Long-duration space flight and bed rest
effects on testosterone and other steroids. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jan;97(1):270-8.

238. Murdaca G, Setti M, Brenci S, Fenoglio D, et al. Modifications of immunological and neuro-
endocrine parameters induced by antiorthostatic bed-rest in human healthy volunteers.
Minerva Med. 2003 Dec;94(6):363-78.

239. Zachwieja JJ, Smith SR, Lovejoy JC, Rood JC, et al. Testosterone administration preserves
protein balance but not muscle strength during 28 days of bed rest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1999 Jan;84(1):207-12.

240. Greenleaf JE, Bernauer EM, Ertl AC, Trowbridge TS, et al. Work capacity during 30 days
of bed rest with isotonic and isokinetic exercise training. J Appl Physiol. 1989
Nov;67(5):1820-6.

241. Zorbas YG, Naexu KA, Federenko YF. Blood serum biochemical changes in physically
conditioned and unconditioned subjects during bed rest and chronic hyperhydration.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 1992 Feb;19(2):137-45.

242. Smorawinski J, Nazar K, Kaciuba—Uscilko H, Kaminska E, et al. Effects of 3-day bed rest on
physiological responses to graded exercise in athletes and sedentary men. J Appl Physiol.
2001 Jul;91(1):249-57.

243. Tou J, Ronca A, Grindeland R, Wade C. Models to study gravitational biology of Mammalian
reproduction. Biol Reprod. 2002 Dec;67(6):1681-7.

244. Vasques M, Lang C, Grindeland RE, Roy RR, et al. Comparison of hyper— and microgravity
on rat muscle, organ weights and selected plasma constituents. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1998 Jun;69(6 Suppl):A2-8.

245. Ortiz RM, Wade CE, Morey-Holton E. Urinary excretion of LH and testosterone from male
rats during exposure to increased gravity: post-spaceflight and centrifugation. Proc Soc Exp
Biol Med. 2000 Oct;225(1):98-102.

246. Amann RP, Deaver DR, Zirkin BR, Grills GS, et al. Effects of microgravity or simulated launch
on testicular function in rats. J Appl Physiol. 1992 Aug;73(2 Suppl):174S—85S.

247. Ortiz RM, Wang TJ, Wade CE. Influence of centrifugation and hindlimb suspension
on testosterone and corticosterone excretion in rats. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1999
May;70(5):499-504.

248. Tash JS, Johnson DC, Enders GC. Long-term (6-wk) hindlimb suspension inhibits
spermatogenesis in adult male rats. J Appl Physiol. 2002 Mar;92(3):1191-8.

249. Macho L, Kvetnansky R, Fickova M, Popova IA, et al. Effects of exposure to space flight
on endocrine regulations in experimental animals. Endocr Regul. 2001 Jun;35(2):101-14.

250. Royland JE, Weber LJ, Fitzpatrick M. Testes size and testosterone levels in a model for
weightlessness. Life Sci. 1994;54(8):545-54.

251. Ricci G, Catizone A, Esposito R, Galdieri M. Microgravity effect on testicular functions.
J Gravit Physiol. 2004 Ju|;11(2):P61-2.

252. Ricci G, Esposito R, Catizone A, Galdieri M. Direct effects of microgravity on testicular
function: analysis of hystological, molecular and physiologic parameters. J Endocrinol Invest.
2008 Mar;31(3):229-37.

"
"110","253. Smith BJ, King JB, Lucas EA, Akhter MP, et al. Skeletal unloading and dietary copper
depletion are detrimental to bone quality of mature rats. J Nutr. 2002 Feb;132(2):190—6.

254. Clarke BL, Khosla S. Androgens and bone. Steroids. 2009 Mar;74(3):296—305.

255. SheffieId-Moore M, Dillon EL, Casperson SL, Gilkison CR, et al. A randomized pilot study
of monthly cycled testosterone replacement or continuous testosterone replacement versus
placebo in older men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Nov;96(11):E1831-7.

256. Paddon-Jones D, SheffieId-Moore M, Urban RJ, Sanford AP, et al. Essential amino acid and
carbohydrate supplementation ameliorates muscle protein loss in humans during 28 days
bedrest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Sep;89(9):4351-8.

257. Brooks N, Cloutier GJ, Cadena SM, Layne JE, et al. Resistance training and timed essential
amino acids protect against the loss of muscle mass and strength during 28 days of bed rest
and energy deficit. J Appl Physiol. 2008 Ju|;105(1):241-8.

258. Trappe TA, Burd NA, Louis ES, Lee GA, et al. Influence of concurrent exercise or nutrition
countermeasures on thigh and calf muscle size and function during 60 days of bed rest in
women. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2007 Oct;191(2):147—59.

259. Antonione R, Caliandro E, Zorat F, Guarnieri G, et al. Whey protein ingestion enhances
postprandial anabolism during short-term bed rest in young men. J Nutr. 2008
Nov;138(11):2212-6.

260. Brooks NE, Cadena SM, Vannier E, Cloutier G, et al. Effects of resistance exercise combined
with essential amino acid supplementation and energy deficit on markers of skeletal
muscle atrophy and regeneration during bed rest and active recovery. Muscle Nerve. 2010
Dec;42(6):927—35.

261. Ferrando AA, Williams BD, Stuart CA, Lane HW, et al. Oral branched-chain amino acids
decrease whoIe-body proteolysis. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1995 Jan-Feb;19(1):47—54.

262. Stein TP, Blanc S. Does protein supplementation prevent muscle disuse atrophy and loss of
strength? Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2011 Oct-Nov;51(9):828—34.

263. Dawson-Hughes B. Interaction of dietary calcium and protein in bone health in humans.

J Nutr. 2003 Mar;133(3):852S—4S.

264. Rafferty K, Heaney RP. Nutrient effects on the calcium economy: emphasizing the potassium
controversy. J Nutr. 2008 Jan;138(1):166S—71S.

265. Dawson-Hughes B. Calcium and protein in bone health. Proc Nutr Soc. 2003 May;62(2):
505-9.

266. Hegsted M, Linkswiler HM. Long-term effects of level of protein intake on calcium
metabolism in young adult women. J Nutr. 1981 Feb;111(2):244-51.

267. Borghi L, Schianchi T, Meschi T, Guerra A, et al. Comparison of two diets for the prevention
of recurrent stones in idiopathic hypercalciuria. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(2):77—84.

268. Dwyer J, Foulkes E, Evans M, Ausman L. Acid/alkaline ash diets: time for assessment and
change. J Am Diet Assoc. 1985 Jul;85(7):841-5.

269. Buclin T, Cosma M, Appenzeller M, Jacquet AF, et al. Diet acids and alkalis influence calcium
retention in bone. Osteoporos Int. 2001 ;12(6):493-9.

270. Zerwekh JE. Nutrition and renal stone disease in space. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):857-63.

271. Palacios C. The role of nutrients in bone health, from A to Z. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr.
2006;46(8):621-8.

272. Kerstetter JE, O'Brien KO, Caseria DM, Wall DE, et al. The impact of dietary protein on
calcium absorption and kinetic measures of bone turnover in women. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2005 Jan;90(1):26—31.

273. Lanham-New SA. Fruit and vegetables: the unexpected natural answer to the question
of osteoporosis prevention? Am J Clin Nutr. 2006 Jun;83(6):1254-5.

"
"111","274. Lanham-New SA. The balance of bone health: tipping the scales in favor of potassium-rich,
bicarbonate-rich foods. J Nutr. 2008 Jan;138(1):172S—7S.

275. Breslau NA, Brinkley L, Hill KD, Pak CY. Relationship of animal protein-rich diet to kidney
stone formation and calcium metabolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1988 Jan;66(1):140-6.

276. Kaneko K, Masaki U, Aikyo M, Yabuki K, et al. Urinary calcium and calcium balance in young
women affected by high protein diet of soy protein isolate and adding sulfur—containing
amino acids and/or potassium. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 1990 Apr;36(2):105-16.

277. Zwart SR, Hargens AR, Smith SM. The ratio of animal protein intake to potassium intake
is a predictor of bone resorption in space flight analogues and in ambulatory subjects.

Am J Clin Nutr. 2004 Oct;80(4):1058-65.

278. Zwart SR, Davis—Street JE, Paddon-Jones D, Ferrando AA, et al. Amino acid
supplementation alters bone metabolism during simulated weightlessness.
J Appl Physiol. 2005 Jul;99(1):134-40.

279. Zwart SR, Hargens AR, Lee SM, Macias BR, et al. Lower body negative pressure treadmill
exercise as a countermeasure for bed rest-induced bone loss in female identical twins.
Bone. 2007 Feb;40(2):529-37.

280. Zwart SR, Smith SM. The impact of space flight on the human skeletal system and potential
nutritional countermeasures. Intl SportMed J. 2005 Dec;6(4):199-214.

281. Smith SM, Davis—Street JE, Fesperman JV, Calkins DS, et al. Evaluation of treadmill exercise
in a lower body negative pressure chamber as a countermeasure for weightlessness-induced
bone loss: a bed rest study with identical twins. J Bone Miner Res. 2003;18:2223-30.

282. Vormann J, Remer T. Dietary, metabolic, physiologic, and disease-related aspects of
acid-base balance: foreword to the contributions of the second International Acid-Base
Symposium. J Nutr. 2008 Feb;138(2):413$-4S.

283. Zwart SR, Oliver SM, Fesperman JV, Kala G, et al. Nutritional status assessment before,
during, and after Iong-duration head-down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2009;80(5
(Supp|)):A15-22.

284. Fenton TR, Eliasziw M, Lyon AW, Tough SC, et al. Meta—analysis of the quantity of calcium
excretion associated with the net acid excretion of the modern diet under the acid-ash diet
hypothesis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Oct;88(4):1159-66.

285. Kerstetter JE, Looker AC, Insogna KL. Low dietary protein and low bone density. Calcif
Tissue Int. 2000 Apr;66(4):313.

286. Kerstetter JE, O'Brien KO, Insogna KL. Low protein intake: the impact on calcium and bone
homeostasis in humans. J Nutr. 2003 Mar;133(3):855S—61S.

287. Kerstetter JE, Svastisalee CM, Caseria DM, Mitnick ME, et al. A threshold for Iow-protein-
diet-induced elevations in parathyroid hormone. Am J Clin Nutr. 2000 Jul;72(1):168-73.

288. Smith MC, Jr, Rambaut PC, Vogel JM, Whittle MW. Bone mineral measurement—experiment
M078. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF, editors. Biomedical results from Skylab (NASA SP-377).
Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1977. p. 183-90.

289. Vogel JM, Whittle MW. Proceedings: Bone mineral content changes in the Skylab astronauts.
Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 1976 Jun;126(6):1296—7.

290. Oganov VS, Grigor'ev AI, Voronin LI, Rakhmanov AS, et al. [Bone mineral density in
cosmonauts after flights lasting 4.5-6 months on the Mir orbital station]. Aviakosm Ekolog
Med. 1992 Sep-Dec;26(5-6):20-4.

291. Vico L, Collet P, Guignandon A, Lafage-Proust MH, et al. Effects of Iong-term microgravity
exposure on cancellous and cortical weight-bearing bones of cosmonauts. Lancet. 2000
May 6;355(9215):1607-11.

292. LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Shackelford L, West S, et al. Bone mineral and lean tissue loss after
long duration space flight. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2000 Dec;1(2):157-60.

"
"112","293. Collet P, Uebelhart D, Vico L, Moro L, et al. Effects of 1- and 6-month spaceflight on bone
mass and biochemistry in two humans. Bone. 1997 Jun;20(6):547-51.

294. Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, et al. Cortical and trabecular bone mineral loss from the
spine and hip in Iong-duration spaceflight. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 June;19(6):1006—12.

295. Weaver CM, LeBlanc A, Smith SM. Calcium and related nutrients in bone metabolism. In:
Lane HW, Schoeller DA, editors. Nutrition in spaceflight and weightlessness models. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2000. p. 179-201.

296. Sibonga JD. Spaceflight-induced bone loss: is there an osteoporosis risk? Curr Osteoporos
Rep. 2013 Jun;11(2):92-8.

297. Sibonga JD, Cavanagh PR, Lang TF, LeBlanc AD, et al. Adaptation of the skeletal system
during Iong-duration spaceflight. Clin Rev Bone Miner Metab. 2008;5(4):249-61.

298. Whitson P, Pietrzyk R, Pak C, Cintron N. Alterations in renal stone risk factors after space
flight. J Urol. 1993;150:803-7.

299. Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Pak CY. Renal stone risk assessment during Space Shuttle flights.
J Urol. 1997 Dec;158(6):2305-10.

300. LeBlanc AD, Spector ER, Evans HJ, Sibonga JD. Skeletal responses to space flight and the
bed rest analog: a review. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2007 Jan-Mar;7(1):33-47.

301. Orwoll ES, Adler RA, Amin S, Binkley N, et al. Skeletal health in Iong-duration astronauts:
nature, assessment and management recommendations from the NASA bone summit.

J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Apr 2;28(6):1243-55.

302. Sibonga JD, Evans HJ, Sung HG, Spector ER, et al. Recovery of spaceflight-induced bone
loss: bone mineral density after Iong-duration missions as fitted with an exponential function.
Bone. 2007 Dec;41(6):973-8.

303. Tilton FE, Degioanni JJC, Schneider VS. Long-term follow-up of Skylab bone
demineralization. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1980;51:1209-13.

304. LeBlanc AD, Schneider VS, Evans HJ, Engelbretson DA, et al. Bone mineral loss and
recovery after 17 weeks of bed rest. J Bone Miner Res. 1990;5z843-50.

305. Smith SM, Nillen JL, LeBlanc A, Lipton A, et al. Collagen cross-Iink excretion during space
flight and bed rest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Oct;83(10):3584-91.

306. Caillot-Augusseau A, Lafage-Proust MH, Soler C, Pernod J, et al. Bone formation and
resorption biological markers in cosmonauts during and after a 180-day space flight
(Euromir 95). Clin Chem. 1998 Mar;44(3):578—85.

307. See H, Itoh T, Murata Y, Ohmori S, et al. Changes in urinary excretion of pyridinium
cross-Iinks during Spacelab-J. Biol Sci Space. 1997 Dec;11(4):321-6.

308. Zittermann A, Heer M, Caillot-Augusso A, Rettberg P, et al. Microgravity inhibits intestinal
calcium absorption as shown by a stable strontium test. Eur J Clin Invest. 2000;30:1036—43.

309. Sorva A, Valimaki M, Risteli J, Risteli L, et al. Serum ionized calcium, intact PTH and
novel markers of bone turnover in bedridden elderly patients. Eur J Clin Invest. 1994
Dec;24(12):806—12.

310. Baecker N, Frings—Meuthen P, Smith SM, Heer M. Short-term high dietary calcium intake
during bedrest has no effect on markers of bone turnover in healthy men. Nutrition. 2010
Sep 16;26(5):522-7.

311. Pavy-Le Traon A, Heer M, Narici MV, Rittweger J, et al. From space to Earth: advances in
human physiology from 20 years of bed rest studies (1986-2006). Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007
Sep;101(2):143-94.

312. Zerwekh JE, Ruml LA, Gottschalk F, Pak CY. The effects of twelve weeks of bed rest on bone
histology, biochemical markers of bone turnover, and calcium homeostasis in eleven normal
subjects. J Bone Miner Res. 1998 Oct;13(10):1594-601.

"
"113","313. Vico L, Chappard D, Alexandre C, Palle S, et al. Effects of a 120 day period of bed-rest
on bone mass and bone cell activities in man: attempts at countermeasure. Bone Miner.
1987;2:383-94.

314. Spector ER, Smith SM, Sibonga JD. Skeletal effects of Iong-duration head-down bed rest.
Aviat Space Environ Med. 2009;80(5 Suppl):A23-8.

315. LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Spector E, Evans H, et al. Calcium absorption, endogenous
excretion, and endocrine changes during and after Iong-term bed rest. Bone. 1995 Apr;16
(4 Suppl):301S—4S.

316. Morgan JL, Zwart SR, Heer M, PIoutz-Snyder R, et al. Bone metabolism and nutritional
status during 30-day head-down-tilt bed rest. J Appl Physiol. 2012 Nov;113(10):1519-29.

317. Smith SM, Zwart SR, Heer M, Lee SMC, et al. WISE-2005: Supine treadmill exercise
within lower body negative pressure and flywheel resistive exercise as a countermeasure
to bed rest-induced bone loss in women during 60-day simulated microgravity. Bone.
2008 Mar;42(3):572-81.

318. Heer M, Baecker N, Mika C, Boese A, et al. Immobilization induces a very rapid increase
in osteoclast activity. Acta Astronaut. 2005 Ju|;57(1):31-6.

319. Arnaud SB, Sherrard DJ, Maloney N, Whalen RT, et al. Effects of 1-week head-down tilt
bed rest on bone formation and the calcium endocrine system. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1992 Jan;63(1):14-20.

320. LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Krebs J, Evans H, et al. Spinal bone mineral after 5 weeks of bed
rest. Calcif Tissue Int. 1987;41:259-61.

321. Whedon GD. Disuse osteoporosis: physiological aspects. Calcif Tissue Int. 1984;36:3146—50.

322. Hwang TIS, Hill K, Schneider V, Pak CYC. Effect of prolonged bedrest on the propensity for
renal stone formation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1988;66:109-12.

323. Donaldson CL, Hulley SB, Vogel JM, Hattner RS, et al. Effect of prolonged bed rest on bone
mineral. Metabolism. 1970 Dec;19(12):1071-84.

324. Whedon G, Lutwak L, Rambaut P, Whittle M, et al. Effect of weightlessness on mineral
metabolism; metabolic studies on Skylab orbital flights. Calcif Tissue Res. 1976;21
Supplz423-30.

325. Hantman DA, Vogel JM, Donaldson CL, Friedman R, et al. Attempts to prevent disuse
osteoporosis by treatment with calcitonin, longitudinal compression and supplementary
calcium and phosphate. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1973 May;36(5):845-58.

326. Deitrick JE, Whedon GD, Shorr E. Effects of immobilization upon various metabolic and
physiologic functions of normal men. Am J Med. 1948;4:3-36.

327. Smith SM, Zwart SR, Heer MA, Baecker N, et al. Effects of artificial gravity during bed rest
on bone metabolism in humans. J Appl Physiol. 2009 Ju|;107(1):47-53.

328. Arnaud SB, Fung P, Popova IA, Morey-Holton ER, et al. Circulating parathyroid hormone
and calcitonin in rats after spaceflight. J Appl Physiol. 1992 Aug;73(2 Suppl):169S—73S.

329. Jowsey J, Riggs BL, Goldsmith RS, Kelly PJ, et al. Effects of prolonged administration
of porcine calcitonin in postmenopausal osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1971
Nov;33(5):752-8.

330. Eyre DR, Dickson IR, Van Ness K. Collagen cross—Iinking in human bone and articular
cartilage. Biochem J. 1988;252:405-500.

331. Uebelhart D, Gineyts E, Chapuy MC, Delmas PD. Urinary excretion of pyridinium crosslinks:
a new marker of bone resorption in metabolic bone disease. Bone Miner. 1990;8(1):87-96.

332. Robins SP, Woitge H, Hesley R, Ju J, et al. Direct, enzyme—Iinked immunoassay for urinary
deoxypyridinoline as a specific marker for measuring bone resorption. J Bone Miner Res.
1994 Oct;9(10):1643-9.

"
"114","333. Seyedin SM, Kung VT, Daniloff YN, Hesley RP, et al. Immunoassay for urinary pyridinoline:
the new marker of bone resorption. J Bone Miner Res. 1993 May;8(5):635-41.

334. Convertino VA. Planning strategies for development of effective exercise and nutrition
countermeasures for Iong-duration space flight. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):880—8.

335. Schneider VS, McDonald J. Skeletal calcium homeostasis and countermeasures to prevent
disuse osteoporosis. Calcif Tissue Int. 1984;36 Suppl 1:S151-44.

336. Oganov VS, Bogomolov W [Human bone system in microgravity: review of research data,
hypotheses and predictability of musculoskeletal system state in extended (exploration)
missions]. Aviakosm Ekolog Med. 2009 Jan-Feb;43(1):3-12.

337. Cavanagh PR, Licata AA, Rice AJ. Exercise and pharmacological countermeasures for bone
loss during Iong-duration space flight. Gravit Space Biol Bull. 2005 Jun;18(2):39-58.

338. Novotny SC, Perusek GP, Rice AJ, Comstock BA, et al. A harness for enhanced comfort and
loading during treadmill exercise in space. Acta Astronaut. 2013;89:205-14.

339. Rittweger J, Frost HM, Schiessl H, Ohshima H, et al. Muscle atrophy and bone loss after
90 days' bed rest and the effects of flywheel resistive exercise and pamidronate: results
from the LTBR study. Bone. 2005 Jun;36(6):1019-29.

340. Watanabe Y, Ohshima H, Mizuno K, Sekiguchi C, et al. Intravenous pamidronate prevents
femoral bone loss and renal stone formation during 90-day bed rest. J Bone Miner Res.
2004 Nov;19(11):1771-8.

341. Grigoriev AI, Morukov BV, Oganov VS, Rakhmanov AS, et al. Effect of exercise and
bisphosphonate on mineral balance and bone density during 360 day antiorthostatic
hypokinesia. J Bone Miner Res. 1992 Dec;7 Suppl 2:S449-55.

342. Thomsen JS, Morukov BV, Vico L, Alexandre C, et al. Cancellous bone structure of iliac
crest biopsies following 370 days of head-down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med.

2005 Oct;76(10):915-22.

343. Berg HE, Eiken O, Miklavcic L, Mekjavic IB. Hip, thigh and calf muscle atrophy and bone
loss after 5-week bedrest inactivity. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2007 Feb;99(3):283-9.

344. Loehr JA, Lee SM, English KL, Sibonga J, et al. Musculoskeletal adaptations to training with
the advanced resistive exercise device. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011 Jan;43(1):146-56.

345. Smith SM, Abrams SA, Davis—Street JE, Heer M, et al. 50 Years of human space travel:
Implications for bone and calcium research. Annu Rev Nutr. 2014:(34:377—400).

346. Young LR, Paloski WH. Short radius intermittent centrifugation as a countermeasure to bed-
rest and 0-G deconditioning: IMAG pilot study summary and recommendations for research.
J Gravit Physiol. 2007 Ju|;14(1):P31-3.

347. Stenger MB, Evans JM, Knapp CF, Lee SM, et al. Artificial gravity training reduces bed rest-
induced cardiovascular deconditioning. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012 Feb;112(2):605-16.

348. Smith SM, Castaneda—Sceppa C, O'Brien KO, Abrams SA, et al. Calcium kinetics during bed
rest with artificial gravity and exercise countermeasures. Osteoporos Int 2014 25:2237—44.

349. Yang Y, Kaplan A, Pierre M, Adams G, et al. Space cycle: a human-powered centrifuge
that can be used for hypergravity resistance training. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2007
Jan;78(1):2-9.

350. Vernikos J. Artificial gravity intermittent centrifugation as a space flight countermeasure.

J Gravit Physiol. 1997 Ju|;4(2):P13-6.

351. Clement G, Bukley AP, editors. Artificial gravity. New York: Springer; 2007.

352. Vernikos J, Ludwig DA, Ertl AC, Wade CE, et al. Effect of standing or walking on
physiological changes induced by head down bed rest: implications for spaceflight.

Aviat Space Environ Med. 1996 Nov;67(11):1069-79.

"
"115","353. Greenleaf JE, Chou JL, Stad NJ, Leftheriotis GP, et al. Short-arm (1.9 m) +2.2 Gz
acceleration: isotonic exercise |oad-O2 uptake relationship. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1999 Dec;70(12):1173-82.

354. Yang Y, Baker M, Graf S, Larson J, et al. Hypergravity resistance exercise: the use
of artificial gravity as potential countermeasure to microgravity. J Appl Physiol.

2007 Nov;103(5):1879-87.

355. Naumann FL, Bennell KL, Wark JD. The effects of +Gz force on the bone mineral density
of fighter pilots. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2001 Mar;72(3):177-81.

356. Naumann FL, Grant MC, Dhaliwal SS. Changes in cervical spine bone mineral density
in response to flight training. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2004 Mar;75(3):255-9.

357. Iwase S, Takada H, Watanabe Y, Ishida K, et al. Effect of centrifuge-induced artificial gravity
and ergometric exercise on cardiovascular deconditioning, myatrophy, and osteoporosis
induced by a -6 degrees head-down bedrest. J Gravit Physiol. 2004 Ju|;11(2):P243-4.

358. Clement G, Pavy-Le Traon A. Centrifugation as a countermeasure during actual and
simulated microgravity: a review. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2004 Jul;92(3):235-48.

359. Heer M, Baecker N, Zwart SR, Smith SM. Interactions between artificial gravity, affected
physiological systems, and nutrition. In: Clement G, Bukley A, editors. Artificial gravity.
New York: Springer; 2007. p. 249-70.

360. Holguin N, Uzer G, Chiang FP, Rubin C, et al. Brief daily exposure to Iow-intensity vibration
mitigates the degradation of the intervertebral disc in a frequency-specific manner.

J Appl Physiol. 2011 Dec;111(6):1846-53.

361. Kiel DP, Hannah MT, Barton BA, Bouxsein ML, et al. Insights from the conduct of a device
trial in older persons: low magnitude mechanical stimulation for musculoskeletal health.
Clin Trials. 2010 Aug;7(4):354-67.

362. Xie L, Rubin C, Judex S. Enhancement of the adolescent murine musculoskeletal system
using Iow-Ievel mechanical vibrations. J Appl Physiol. 2008 Apr;104(4):1056-62.

363. Holguin N, Muir J, Rubin C, Judex S. Short applications of very Iow-magnitude vibrations
attenuate expansion of the intervertebral disc during extended bed rest. Spine J.

2009 Jun;9(6):470-7.

364. Belavy DL, Beller G, Armbrecht G, Perschel FH, et al. Evidence for an additional effect
of whole-body vibration above resistive exercise alone in preventing bone loss during
prolonged bed rest. Osteoporos Int. 2011 May;22(5):1581-91.

365. Rittweger J, Beller G, Armbrecht G, Mulder E, et al. Prevention of bone loss during
56 days of strict bed rest by side-alternating resistive vibration exercise. Bone. 2010
Jan;46(1):137-47.

366. Wang H, Wan Y, Tam KF, Ling S, et al. Resistive vibration exercise retards bone loss in
weight-bearing skeletons during 60 days bed rest. Osteoporos Int. 2012 Aug;23(8):2169-78.

367. Lockwood DR, Vogel JM, Schneider VS, Hulley SB. Effect of the diphosphonate EHDP
on bone mineral metabolism during prolonged bed rest. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1975;41:533-41.

368. Iwamoto J, Takeda T, Sato Y. Interventions to prevent bone loss in astronauts during space
flight. Keio J Med. 2005 Jun;54(2):55-9.

369. LeBlanc AD, Driscol TB, Shackelford LC, Evans HJ, et al. Alendronate as an effective
countermeasure to disuse induced bone loss. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact.
2002;2(4):335-43.

370. Shapiro J, Smith B, Beck T, Ballard P, et al. Treatment with zoledronic acid ameliorates
negative geometric changes in the proximal femur following acute spinal cord injury. Calcif
Tissue Int. 2007 May;80(5):316-22.

"
"116","371. Minaire P, Berard E, Meunier PJ, Edouard C, et al. Effects of disodium dichloromethylene
diphosphonate on bone loss in paraplegic patients. J Clin Invest. 1981 Oct;68(4):1086—92.

372. Maheshwari UR, Leybin L, McDonald JT, Schneider VS, et al. Effect of dichloromethylene
diphosphonate on fluoride balance in healthy men. J Dent Res. 1983 May;62(5):559-61.

373. Okada A, Ohshima H, Itoh Y, Yasui T, et al. Risk of renal stone formation induced by long-
term bed rest could be decreased by premedication with bisphosphonate and increased
by resistive exercise. Int J Urol. 2008 Jul;15(7):630—5.

374. Chappard D, Alexandre C, Palle S, Vico L, et al. Effects of a bisphosphonate (1-hydroxy
ethylidene-1,1 bisphosphonic acid) on osteoclast number during prolonged bed rest in
healthy humans. Metabolism. 1989 Sep;38(9):822—5.

375. Li CY, Majeska RJ, Laudier DM, Mann R, et al. High-dose risedronate treatment partially
preserves cancellous bone mass and microarchitecture during Iong-term disuse. Bone.
2005 Sep;37(3):287—95.

376. Li CY, Price C, Delisser K, Nasser P, et al. Long-term disuse osteoporosis seems less
sensitive to bisphosphonate treatment than other osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res.

2005 Jan;20(1):117—24.

377. Zorbas YG, Kakuris KK, Deogenov VA, Yerullis KB. Inadequacy of calcium supplements
to normalize muscle calcium deficiency in healthy subjects during prolonged hypokinesia.
Nutrition. 2008 Mar;24(3):217—23.

378. Heer M, Baecker N, Wnendt S, Fischer A, Biolo G, Frings—Meuthen P. How fast is recovery
of impaired glucose tolerance after 21 -day bed rest (NUC Study) in healthy adults?
ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Mar 11;2014:803083. doi:10.1155/2014/803083.

379. Hulley SB, Vogel JM, Donaldson CL, Bayers JH, et al. The effect of supplemental oral
phosphate on the bone mineral changes during prolonged bed rest. J Clin Invest.

1971 ;50:2506-1 8.

380. Sun D, Krishnan A, Zaman K, Lawrence R, et al. Dietary n-3 fatty acids decrease
osteoclastogenesis and loss of bone mass in ovariectomized mice. J Bone Miner Res.
2003 Ju|;18(7):1206-16.

381. Schneider VS, LeBlanc A, Huntoon CL. Prevention of space flight induced soft tissue
calcification and disuse osteoporosis. Acta Astronaut. 1993;29(2):139-40.

382. Whedon GD, Lutwak L, Reid J, Rambaut PC, et al. Mineral and nitrogen metabolic studies
on Skylab orbital space flights. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 1974;87:95-110.

383. Whedon G, Lutwak L, Rambaut P, Whittle M, et al. Mineral and nitrogen balance study
observations: the second manned Skylab mission. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1976;47:391-6.

384. Parfitt AM. Bone effects of space flight: analysis by quantum concept of bone remodelling.
Acta Astronaut. 1981 ;8(9-10):1083-90.

385. Rambaut PC, Johnston RS. Prolonged weightlessness and calcium loss in man.

Acta Astronaut. 1979;6:1113-22.

386. Grigoriev AI, Oganov VS, Bakulin AV, Poliakov W, et al. [Clinical and physiological evaluation
of bone changes among astronauts after Iong-term space flights]. Aviakosm Ekolog Med.
1998;32:21-5.

387. Minaire P, Meunier P, Edouard C, Bernard J, et al. Quantitative histological data on disuse
osteoporosis: comparison with biological data. Calcif Tissue Int. 1974;17:57—73.

388. Giangregorio L, Blimkie CJ. Skeletal adaptations to alterations in weight-bearing activity:
a comparison of models of disuse osteoporosis. Sports Med. 2002;32(7):459-76.

389. Scott JM, Warburton DE, Williams D, Whelan S, et al. Challenges, concerns and common
problems: physiological consequences of spinal cord injury and microgravity. Spinal Cord.
2011 Jan;49(1):4-16.

"
"117","390. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2011.

391. Davis CD, Hartmuller V, Freedman DM, Hartge P, et aI. Vitamin D and cancer: current
dilemmas and future needs. Nutr Rev. 2007 Aug;65(8 Pt 2):S71-4.

392. Holick MF. Vitamin D deficiency in 2010: health benefits of vitamin D and sunlight: a D-bate.
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;7(2):73-5.

393. Bikle DD. Vitamin D regulation of immune function. Vitam Horm. 2011;86:1-21.

394. Bikle D. Nonclassic actions of vitamin D. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jan;94(1):26-34.

395. Davis CD, Milner JA. Vitamin D and colon cancer. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol.

2011 Feb;5(1):67-81.

396. Scragg R. Vitamin D and public health: an overview of recent research on common diseases
and mortality in adulthood. Public Health Nutr. 2011 Sep;14(9):1515-32.

397. Grant WB. An ecologic study of dietary and solar ultraviolet-B links to breast carcinoma
mortality rates. Cancer. 2002 Jan 1;94(1):272-81.

398. Ahonen MH, Tenkanen L, Teppo L, Hakama M, et al. Prostate cancer risk and prediagnostic
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels (Finland). Cancer Causes Control. 2000 Oct;11(9):847-52.

399. Grant WB. An estimate of premature cancer mortality in the U.S. due to inadequate doses
of solar ultraviolet-B radiation. Cancer. 2002 Mar 15;94(6):1867-75.

400. Hewison M, Zehnder D, Chakraverty R, Adams JS. Vitamin D and barrier function: a novel
role for extra-renal 1 alpha-hydroxylase. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Feb 27;215(1-2):31-8.

401. Norman AW. Vitamin D. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
8th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2001.

402. Holick MF, Chen TC, Lu Z, Sauter E. Vitamin D and skin physiology: a D-Iightful story.

J Bone Miner Res. 2007 Dec;22 Suppl 2:V28-33.

403. Gilchrest BA. Sun exposure and vitamin D sufficiency. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Aug;88(2):
5703-73.

404. Mohr SB, Garland CF, Gorham ED, Grant WB, et aI. Relationship between low
ultraviolet B irradiance and higher breast cancer risk in 107 countries. Breast J.

2008 May-Jun;14(3):255-60.

405. Gilchrest BA. Sun protection and Vitamin D: three dimensions of obfuscation.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Mar;103(3-5):655-63.

406. Smith SM, Gardner KK, Locke J, Zwart SR. Vitamin D supplementation during Antarctic
winter. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Apr;89(4):1092-8.

407. Zwart SR, Mehta SK, PIoutz-Snyder R, Bourbeau Y, et aI. Response to vitamin D
supplementation during Antarctic winter is related to BMI, and supplementation can
mitigate Epstein-Barr virus reactivation. J Nutr. 2011 Apr 1;141(4):692-7.

408. Zwart SR, Parsons H, Kimlin M, Innis SM, et al. A 250 pg/week dose of vitamin D
was as effective as a 50 pg/d dose in healthy adults, but a regimen of four weekly followed
by monthly doses of 1250 pg raised the risk of hypercalciuria. Br J Nutr. 2013 Apr 18;
110:1866—72.

409. Smith SM, Heer M, Zwart SR. Nutrition and bone health in space. In: Holick M, Nieves J,
editors. Nutrition and bone health, 2nd ed. New York: Springer; in press Nov 2014.

410. Bjorkman M, Sorva A, Risteli J, Tilvis R. Vitamin D supplementation has minor effects on
parathyroid hormone and bone turnover markers in vitamin D-deficient bedridden older
patients. Age Ageing. 2008 Jan;37(1):25-31.

411. Thys-Jacobs S, Chan FKW, Koberle LMC, et a. Hypercalcemia due to vitamin D toxicity. In:
Feldman D, Glorieux FH, Pike JW, editors. Vitamin D. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1997.
p. 883-901.

"
"118","412. Hathcock JN, Shao A, Vieth R, Heaney R. Risk assessment for vitamin D. Am J Clin Nutr.
2007 Jan;85(1):6-18.

413. Vieth R. Vitamin D supplementation, 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations, and safety.

Am J Clin Nutr. 1999 May;69(5):842-56.

414. Vieth R. Vitamin D toxicity, policy, and science. J Bone Miner Res. 2007 Dec;22 Suppl 2:
V64-8.

415. Ferland G. Vitamin K. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006. p. 220-30.

416. Wolf J, Vermeer C. Potential effect of vitamin K on microgravity-induced bone loss.

J Gravit Physiol. 1996;3(2):29-32.

417. Caillot-Augusseau A, Vico L, Heer M, Voroviev D, et al. Space flight is associated with rapid
decreases of undercarboxylated osteocalcin and increases of markers of bone resorption
without changes in their circadian variation: observations in two cosmonauts. Clin Chem.
2000;46:1136-43.

418. Vermeer C, Wolf J, Craciun AM, Knapen MH. Bone markers during a 6-month space flight:
effects of vitamin K supplementation. J Gravit Physiol. 1998 Oct;5(2):65-9.

419. Zwart SR, Booth SL, Peterson JW, Wang Z, et al. Vitamin K status in spaceflight and
ground-based models of spaceflight. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 May;26(5):948-54.

420. Heaney RP, McCarron DA, Dawson-Hughes B, Oparil S, et al. Dietary changes favorably
affect bone remodeling in older adults. J Am Diet Assoc. 1999 Oct;99(10):1228-33.

421. Anderson JJB, Klemmer PJ, Watts MLS, Garner SC, et al. Phosphorus. In: Bowman BA,
Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International
Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006. p. 383-99.

422. Calvo MS, Moshfegh AJ, Tucker KL. Assessing the health impact of phosphorus in the
food supply: issues and considerations. Adv Nutr. 2014;5(1):104-13.

423. Chang AR, Lazo M, Appel LJ, Gutierrez OM, et al. High dietary phosphorus intake is
associated with all-cause mortality: results from NHANES ”I. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014
Feb;99(2):320-7.

424. Takeda E, Yamamoto H, Yamanaka—Okumura H, Taketani Y. Increasing dietary phosphorus
intake from food additives: potential for negative impact on bone health. Adv Nutr.
2014;5(1):92-7.

425. National Aeronautics and Space Administration Johnson Space Center. Nutrition
requirements, standards, and operating bands for exploration missions. Houston, TX:
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center; 2005. Report No.: JSC-63555.

426. National Aeronautics and Space Administration Johnson Space Center. Nutritional
requirements for International Space Station (ISS) missions up to 360 days. Houston, TX:
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center; 1996.
Report No.: JSC-28038.

427. Shils ME. Magnesium. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, Ross AC, editors. Modern nutrition
in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 169-92.

428. Leach CS, Rambaut PC. Biochemical observations of long duration manned orbital
spaceflight. J Am Med Womens Assoc. 1975 Apr;30(4):153-72.

429. Leach-Huntoon CS, Schneider H, Cintron NM, Landry R. Combined blood investigations. In:
Bungo MW, Bagian TM, Bowman MA, Levitan BM, editors. Results of the life sciences DSOS
conducted aboard the Space Shuttle 1981-1986. Houston: Space Biomedical Research
Institute, Johnson Space Center; 1987. p. 7-11.

430. Leach CS. Biochemical and hematologic changes after short-term space flight.
Microgravity Q. 1992;2:69-75.

"
"119","431. Prokhonchukov AA, Zaitsev VP, Shakhunov BA, Zhizhina NA, et al. [Effect of space flight
on the concentration of sodium, copper, manganese and magnesium in the bones of the
skeleton]. Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 1978 Nov-Dec(6):65-70.

432. Schwille PO, Schmiedl A, Herrmann U, Fan J, et aI. Magnesium, citrate, magnesium citrate
and magnesium-alkali citrate as modulators of calcium oxalate crystallization in urine:
observations in patients with recurrent idiopathic calcium urolithiasis. Urol Res. 1999
Apr;27(2):117-26.

433. Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Jones JA, Nelman-Gonzalez M, et al. Effect of potassium Citrate
therapy on the risk of renal stone formation during spaceflight. J Urol. 2009 Nov;182(5):
2490-6.

434. Cousins RJ. Zinc. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006. p. 445-57.

435. Krebs JM, Schneider VS, LeBlanc AD, Kuo MC, et al. Zinc and copper balances in healthy
adult males during and after 17 wk of bed rest. Am J Clin Nutr. 1993 Dec;58(6):897-901.

436. Krebs JM, Schneider VS, LeBlanc AD. Zinc, copper, and nitrogen balances during bed rest
and fluoride supplementation in healthy adult males. Am J Clin Nutr. 1988 Mar;47(3):509-14.

437. Cann CE, Adachi RR. Bone resorption and mineral excretion in rats during spaceflight.

Am J Physiol. 1983;13:R327-31.

438. Kondrashov V, Rothenberg SJ, Chettle D, Zerwekh J. Evaluation of potentially significant
increase of lead in the blood during Iong-term bed rest and space flight. Physiol Meas.
2005 Feb;26(1):1-12.

439. Kondrashov VS. Cosmonauts and lead: resorption and increased blood lead levels during
long term space flight. J Med Toxicol. 2006 Dec;2(4):172-3.

440. Garcia HD, Hays SM, Tsuji JS. Modeling of blood lead levels in astronauts exposed to lead
from microgravity-accelerated bone loss. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2013 Dec;84(12):
1229-34.

441. Smith SM, McCoy T, Gazda D, Morgan JL, et aI. Space flight calcium: implications for
astronaut health, spacecraft operations, and Earth. Nutrients. 2012 Dec;4(12):2047-68.

442. Morgan JL, Skulan JL, Gordon GW, Romaniello SJ, et aI. Rapidly assessing changes
in bone mineral balance using natural stable calcium isotopes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2012 Jun 19;109(25):9989-94.

443. Russell WA, Papanastassiou DA, Tombrello TA. Ca isotope fractionation on earth and
other solar—system materials. Geochim Cosmochim Acta. 1978;42(8):1075-90.

444. Morgan JL, Gordon GW, Arrua RC, Skulan JL, et aI. High-precision measurement of
variations in calcium isotope ratios in urine by multiple collector inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2011 Sep 15;83(18):6956-62.

445. Skulan J, Bullen T, Anbar AD, Puzas JE, et al. Natural calcium isotopic composition
of urine as a marker of bone mineral balance. Clin Chem. 2007 Jun;53(6):1155-8.

446. Skulan JL, DePaoIo DJ. Calcium isotope fractionation between soft and mineralized tissue
as a monitor of calcium use in vertebrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96(24):13709-13.

447. Beard JL. Iron. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition. 9th ed.
Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 2006. p. 430-44.

448. Fairbanks VF. Iron in medicine and nutrition. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, Ross AC,
editors. Modern nutrition in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 193-221.

449. Milne DB, Gallagher SK, Nielsen FH. Response of various indices of iron status to acute iron
depletion produced in menstruating women by low iron intake and phlebotomy. Clin Chem.
1990 Mar;36(3):487-91.

"
"120","450. Prieto J, Barry M, Sherlock S. Serum ferritin in patients with iron overload and with acute
and chronic liver disease. Gastroenterology. 1975;68:525-33.

451. Viteri FE, Toran B. Anemia and physical work capacity. Clinical Hematology. 1974;3:609-26.

452. Lozoff B. Behavioral alterations in iron deficiency. Adv Pediatr. 1988;35:331-59.

453. Dallman PR. Iron deficiency and the immune response. Am J Clin Nutr. 1987;46:329-34.

454. Yip R, Dallman PR. Iron. In: Ziegler EE, Filer LJ, Jr., editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
7th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 1996. p. 277-92.

455. Cook JD. Adaptation in iron metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990 Feb;51(2):301-8.

456. Finch CA, Huebers HA. Perspectives in iron metabolism. N Engl J Med. 1982;306:1520-8.

457. Dao MC, Meydani SN. Iron biology, immunology, aging, and obesity: four fields connected
by the small peptide hormone hepcidin. Adv Nutr. 2013;4(6):602—17.

458. Sazawal S, Black RE, Ramsan M, Chwaya HM, et al. Effects of routine prophylactic
supplementation with iron and folic acid on admission to hospital and mortality in preschool
children in a high malaria transmission setting: community-based, randomised, placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet. 2006 Jan 14;367(9505):133-43.

459. Doherty CP. Host-pathogen interactions: the role of iron. J Nutr. 2007 May;137(5):1341-4.

460. Alfrey CP, Rice L, Udden MM, Driscoll TB. Neocytolysis: physiological down-regulator
of red-cell mass. Lancet. 1997 May 10;349(9062):1389-90.

461. Alfrey CP, Udden MM, Leach-Huntoon C, Driscoll T, et al. Control of red blood cell mass
in spaceflight. J Appl Physiol. 1996;81:98-104.

462. Johnson PC. The erythropoietic effects of weightlessness. In: Dunn CDR, editor. Current
concepts in erythropoiesis. New York: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.; 1983. p. 279-300.

463. Udden MM, Driscoll TB, Pickett MH, Leach-Huntoon CS, et al. Decreased production of red
blood cells in human subjects exposed to microgravity. J Lab Clin Med. 1995;125:442-9.

464. Smith SM. Red blood cell and iron metabolism during space flight. Nutrition.

2002 Oct;18(10):864-6.

465. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron,
chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium,
and zinc. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.

466. Smith SM, Davis—Street JE, Fontenot TB, Lane HW. Assessment of a portable Clinical blood
analyzer during space flight. Clin Chem. 1997 Jun;43(6 Pt 1)(6 Pt 1):1056-65.

467. Convertino VA. Clinical aspects of the control of plasma volume at microgravity and
during return to one gravity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996 Oct;28(10 Suppl):S45-52.

468. Lane HW, Alfrey CP, Driscoll TB, Smith SM, et al. Control of red blood cell mass during
spaceflight. J Gravitational Physiol. 1996 Sep;3(2):87-8.

469. Zwart SR, Morgan JL, Smith SM. Iron status and its relations with oxidative damage
and bone loss during Iong-duration space flight on the International Space Station.

Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 May 29;98:217-23.

470. Beilby J, Olynyk J, Ching S, Prins A, et al. Transferrin index: an alternative method for
calculating the iron saturation of transferrin. Clin Chem. 1992 Oct;38(10):2078-81.

471. Mendes JF, Arruda SF, Siqueira EM, Ito MK, et al. Iron status and oxidative stress
biomarkers in adults: a preliminary study. Nutrition. 2009 Apr;25(4):379-84.

472. Tuomainen TP, Loft S, Nyyssonen K, Punnonen K, et al. Body iron is a contributor
to oxidative damage of DNA. Free Radic Res. 2007 Mar;41(3):324-8.

473. Syrovatka P, Kraml P, Potockova J, Fialova L, et al. Relationship between increased
body iron stores, oxidative stress and insulin resistance in healthy men. Ann Nutr Metab.
2009 Jul 27;54(4):268-74.

"
"121","474. Dunn CDR, Lange RD, Kimzey SL, Johnson PC, et al. Serum erythropoietin titers during
prolonged bedrest; relevance to the ""anaemia"" of space flight. Eur J Appl Physiol.
1984;52:178-82.

475. Rice L, Ruiz W, Driscoll T, Whitley CE, et al. Neocytolysis on descent from altitude:

a newly recognized mechanism for the control of red cell mass. Ann Intern Med.
2001 Apr 17;134(8):652-6.

476. Smith SM, Davis—Street JE, Fesperman JV, Smith MD, et al. Nutritional assessment during
a 14-d saturation dive: the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations V Project.

J Nutr. 2004;134:1765-71.

477. Bader N, Bosy-Westphal A, Koch A, Mueller MJ. Influence of vitamin C and E
supplementation on oxidative stress induced by hyperbaric oxygen in healthy men.
Ann Nutr Metab. 2006;50(3):173-6.

478. Rocco M, Antonelli M, Letizia V, Alampi D, et al. Lipid peroxidation, circulating cytokine
and endothelin 1 levels in healthy volunteers undergoing hyperbaric oxygenation.
Minerva Anestesiol. 2001 May;67(5):393-400.

479. Alleva R, Nasole E, Di Donate F, Borghi B, et al. alpha—Lipoic acid supplementation inhibits
oxidative damage, accelerating chronic wound healing in patients undergoing hyperbaric
oxygen therapy. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jul 29;333(2):404-10.

480. Djurhuus R, Segadal K, Svardal AM. Glutathione in blood cells decreases without DNA
breaks after a simulated saturation dive to 250 msw. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2006
Jun;77(6):597-604.

481. Zwart SR, Jessup JM, Ji J, Smith SM. Saturation diving alters folate status and biomarkers
of DNA damage and repair. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31058.

482. Kim BJ, Ahn SH, Bae SJ, Kim EH, et al. Iron overload accelerates bone loss in healthy
postmenopausal women and middle-aged men: a 3-year retrospective longitudinal study.
J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Nov;27(11):2279-90.

483. He X, Hahn P, Iacovelli J, Wong R, et al. Iron homeostasis and toxicity in retinal degeneration.
Prog Retin Eye Res. 2007 Nov;26(6):649-73.

484. Morgan JL, Ritchie LE, Crucian BE, Theriot C, et al. Increased dietary iron and radiation in
rats promote oxidative stress, induce localized and systemic immune system responses,
and alter colon mucosal environment. FASEB J. 2014 Mar;28(3):1486-98.

485. Sempos CT, Looker AC, Gillum RF, Makuc DM. Body iron stores and the risk of coronary
heart disease. N Engl J Med. 1994;330(16):1119-24.

486. Ascherio A, Willett WC. Are body iron stores related to the risk of coronary heart disease?
(Editorial). N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1152-4.

487. Sullivan JL. Stored iron and ischemic heart disease: empirical support for a new paradigm
(Editorial Comment). Circulation. 1992;86:1036—7.

488. Lauffer RB. Iron stores and the international variation in mortality from coronary artery
disease. Lancet. 1991 ;2:1288-9.

489. Salonen JT, Nyyssonen K, Korpela H, Tuomilehto J, et al. High stored iron levels are
associated with excess risk of myocardial infarction in eastern Finnish men. Circulation.
1992;86(3):803-11.

490. Sullivan JL. The iron paradigm of ischemic heart disease. Am Heart J. 1989;117:1177-88.

491. Knekt P, Reunanen A, Takkunen H, Aromaa A, et al. Body iron stores and risk of cancer.
Int J Cancer. 1994;56(3):379-82.

492. Mainous AG, 3rd, Wells BJ, Koopman RJ, Everett CJ, et al. Iron, lipids, and risk of cancer
in the Framingham Offspring cohort. Am J Epidemiol. 2005 Jun 15;161(12):1115-22.

"
"122","493. Schreiber WE. Iron, porphyrin, and bilirubin metabolism. In: Kaplan LA, Pesce AJ, editors.
Clinical chemistry: theory, analysis, and correlation. St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Books, Inc.;
1996. p. 696-715.

494. Wilson JW, Ott CM, Honer zu Bentrup K, Ramamurthy R, et al. Space flight alters bacterial
gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for global regulator qu. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 9;104(41):16299-304.

495. Payne SM. Iron and virulence in the family Enterobacteriaceae. Crit Rev Microbiol.
1988;16(2):81-111.

496. Prohaska JR. Copper. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006. p. 458-70.

497. Davis AT, Franz FP, Courtnay DA, Ullrey DE, et al. Plasma vitamin and mineral status in home
parenteral nutrition patients. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1987 Sep-Oct;11(5):480-5.

498. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes: a risk assessment
model for establishing upper intake levels for nutrients. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press; 1998.

499. Higuchi S, Higashi A, Nakamura T, Matsuda |. Nutritional copper deficiency in severely
handicapped patients on a low copper enteral diet for a prolonged period: estimation of
the required dose of dietary copper. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1988 JuI-Aug;7(4):583-7.

500. Milne DB. Copper intake and assessment of copper status. Am J Clin Nutr. 1998 May;

67(5 Suppl):1041S—5S.

501. Bourre JM. Effects of nutrients (in food) on the structure and function of the nervous system:
update on dietary requirements for brain. Part 1: micronutrients. J Nutr Health Aging.
2006 Sep-Oct;10(5):377-85.

502. Taylor GR, Konstantinova I, Sonnenfeld G, Jennings R. Changes in the immune system
during and after spaceflight. Adv Space Biol Med. 1997;6:1-32.

503. Borchers AT, Keen CL, Gershwin ME. Microgravity and immune responsiveness: implications
for space travel. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):889-98.

504. Tipton CM, Greenleaf JE, Jackson CG. Neuroendocrine and immune system responses
with spaceflights. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996 Aug;28(8):988-98.

505. Crucian BE, Stowe RP, Pierson DL, Sams CF. Immune system dysregulation following
short- vs Iong-duration spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2008 Sep;79(9):835-43.

506. Devine A, Hodgson JM, Dick IM, Prince RL. Tea drinking is associated with benefits on
bone density in older women. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007 Oct;86(4):1243-7.

507. Norsk P. Blood pressure regulation IV: adaptive responses to weightlessness.

Eur J Appl Physiol. 2014 Mar;114(3):481-97.

508. Norsk P, Damgaard M, Petersen L, Gybel M, et al. Vasorelaxation in space. Hypertension.
2006;47(1):69-73.

509. Aubert AE, Beckers F, Verheyden B. Cardiovascular function and basics of physiology
in microgravity. Acta Cardiol. 2005 Apr;60(2):129-51.

510. Zhang LF. Region-specific vascular remodeling and its prevention by artificial gravity
in weightless environment. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013 Dec;113(12):2873-95.

511. Moore AD, Lee SMC, Stenger MB, Platts SH. Cardiovascular exercise in the U.S. space
program: past, present, and future. Acta Astronaut. 2010;66:974-88.

512. Lee SM, Moore AD, Everett ME, Stenger MB, et al. Aerobic exercise deconditioning and
countermeasures during bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2010 Jan;81(1):52-63.

513. Iwasaki K, Levine BD, Zhang R, Zuckerman JH, et al. Human cerebral autoregulation
before, during and after spaceflight. J Physiol. 2007 Mar 15;579(Pt 3):799-810.

"
"123","514. Nie ZL, Wang ZM, Zhou B, Tang ZP, et al. Magnesium intake and incidence of stroke:
meta—analysis of cohort studies. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 Mar;23(3):169-76.

515. Rowe WJ. As with space flight, a magnesium deficit may be responsible for both peripheral
vascular dysfunction and kidney disease. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Apr 15;105(8):1203-4.

516. Volpe SL. Magnesium in disease prevention and overall health. Adv Nutr.
2013;4(3):378S—83S.

517. Bellavia A, Larsson SC, Bottai M, Wolk A, et al. Fruit and vegetable consumption and
all-cause mortality: a dose-response analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Aug;98(2):454-9.

518. Boeing H, Bechthold A, Bub A, Ellinger S, et al. Critical review: vegetables and fruit in
the prevention of chronic diseases. Eur J Nutr. 2012 Sep;51(6):637-63.

519. Cocate PG, Natali AJ, de Oliveira A, Longo GZ, et al. Fruit and vegetable intake and related
nutrients are associated with oxidative stress markers in middle-aged men. Nutrition.
2014 Jun;30(6):660-5.

520. Leenders M, Sluijs I, Ros MM, Boshuizen HC, et al. Fruit and vegetable consumption and
mortality: European prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition. Am J Epidemiol.
2013 Aug 15;178(4):590-602.

521. Macready AL, George TW, Chong MF, Alimbetov DS, et al. FIavonoid-rich fruit and
vegetables improve microvascular reactivity and inflammatory status in men at risk
of cardiovascular disease--FLAVURS: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr.

2014 Mar;99(3):479-89.

522. Oyebode O, Gordon-Dseagu V, Walker A, Mindell JS. Fruit and vegetable consumption
and aII-cause, cancer and CVD mortality: analysis of Health Survey for England data.
J Epidemiol Community Health. 2014 Mar 31.

523. Oh MS, Uribarri J. Electrolytes, water, and acid-base balance. In: Shils ME, Olson JA,
Shike M, Ross AC, editors. Modern nutrition in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 105-40.

524. Tietz NW, Pruden EL, Siggaard-Andersen O. Electrolytes. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER,
editors. Tietz textbook of clinical chemistry. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders
Company; 1994. p. 1887-973.

525. Preuss HG. Electrolytes: sodium, chloride, and potassium. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM,
editors. Present knowledge in nutrition. 8th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences
Institute Press; 2006. p. 409-21.

526. Pitts RF. Ionic composition of body fluids. The physiological basis of diuretic therapy.
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Publisher; 1959.

527. Lynn MP, Fouad F, Cook SA, Napoli CA, et al. Alterations in cardiac function and
cardiopulmonary blood volume in chronic sodium depletion in dogs. Clin Sci (Lond).
1980 Dec;59 Suppl 6:393s-5s.

528. Benedict FG. A study of prolonged fasting. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution
of Washington; 1915.

529. Keys AB, Brozek J, Henschel A. The biology of human starvation. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press; 1950.

530. Gamble JL, Ross GS, Tisdall FF. The metabolism of fixed base during fasting.

J Biol Chem. 1923;57(3):633-95.

531. Smith SM, Krauhs JM, Leach CS. Regulation of body fluid volume and electrolyte
concentrations in spaceflight. Adv Space Biol Med. 1997;6:123-65.

532. Heer M, Zittermann A, Hoetzel D. Role of nutrition during Iong-term spaceflight.

Acta Astronaut. 1995 Feb-Mar;35(4-5):297-311.

"
"124","533. Gerzer R, Heer M. Regulation of body fluid and salt homeostasis - from observations
in space to new concepts on Earth. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;6(4):299-304.

534. Norsk P, Drummer C, Christensen NJ, Cirillo M, et al. Revised hypothesis and future
perspectives. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Sep;38(3):696—8.

535. Lane HW, Leach C, Smith SM. Fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. In: Lane HW, Schoeller DA,
editors. Nutrition in spaceflight and weightlessness models. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press;
2000. p. 119-39.

536. Drummer C, Heer M, Dressendc‘jrfer RA, Strasburger CJ, et al. Reduced natriuresis during
weightlessness. Clin Investig. 1993;71:678-863.

537. Heer M, Frings—Meuthen P, Titze J, Boschmann M, et al. Increasing sodium intake from
a previous low or high intake affects water, electrolyte and acid-base differently. Br J Nutr.
2009 May;101(9):1286—94.

538. Machnik A, Dahlmann A, Kopp C, Goss J, et al. Mononuclear phagocyte system depletion
blocks interstitial tonicity-responsive enhancer binding protein/vascular endothelial growth
factor C expression and induces saIt-sensitive hypertension in rats. Hypertension. 2010
Mar;55(3):755-61.

539. Machnik A, Neuhofer W, Jantsch J, Dahlmann A, et al. Macrophages regulate saIt-dependent
volume and blood pressure by a vascular endothelial growth factor—C-dependent buffering
mechanism. Nat Med. 2009 May;15(5):545-52.

540. Rakova N, Juttner K, Dahlmann A, Schroder A, et al. Long-term space flight simulation
reveals infradian rhythmicity in human Na(+) balance. Cell Metab. 2013 Jan 8;17(1):125-31.

541. Titze J, Dahlmann A, Lerchl K, Kopp C, et al. Spooky sodium balance. Kidney Int.

2014 Apr;85(4):759-67.

542. Titze J, Krause H, Hecht H, Dietsch P, et al. Reduced osmotically inactive Na storage
capacity and hypertension in the Dahl model. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002
Ju|;283(1):F134-41.

543. Titze J, Shakibaei M, Schafflhuber M, Schulze-Tanzil G, et al. Glycosaminoglycan
polymerization may enable osmotically inactive Na+ storage in the skin. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol. 2004 Ju|;287(1):H203-8.

544. Ivanova LN, Archibasova VK, Shterental |. [Sodium-depositing function of the skin in white
rats]. Fiziol Zh SSSR Im | M Sechenova. 1978 Mar;64(3):358—63.

545. Goulding A. Effects of dietary NaCI supplements on parathyroid function, bone turnover
and bone composition in rats taking restricted amounts of calcium. Miner Electrolyte Metab.
1980;4:203-8.

546. Goulding A, Lim PE. Effects of varying dietary salt intake on the fasting urinary excretion
of sodium, calcium and hydroxyproline in young women. N Z Med J. 1983;96:853-4.

547. Evans CE, Chughtai AY, Blumsohn A, Giles M, et al. The effect of dietary sodium on calcium
metabolism in premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1997;51(6):
394-9.

548. Castenmiller JJM, Mensink RP, van der Heijden L, Kouwenhoven T, et al. The effect of dietary
sodium on urinary calcium and potassium excretion in normotensive men with different
calcium intakes. Am J Clin Nutr. 1985;41:52-60.

549. Cohen AJ, Roe FJ. Review of risk factors for osteoporosis with particular reference to a
possible aetiological role of dietary salt. Food Chem Toxicol. 2000 Feb-Mar;38(2-3):237-53.

550. Heer M, Baisch F, Drummer C, Gerzer R. Long-term elevations of dietary sodium produce
parallel increases in the renal excretion of urodilatin and sodium. In: Sahm PR, Keller MH,
Schiewe B, editors. Proceedings of the Norderney Symposium on Scientific Results of the
German Spacelab Mission D-2. Norderney, Germany: Wissenschaftliche Projecthhrung D-2;
1995. p. 708-14.

"
"125","551. Ho SC, Chen YM, Woo JL, Leung SS, et al. Sodium is the leading dietary factor associated
with urinary calcium excretion in Hong Kong Chinese adults. Osteoporos Int. 2001;
12:723-31.

552. Nordin B, Need A, Morris H, Horowitz M, et al. Sodium and osteoporosis. In: Lesourd B,
Rapin C, Sachet P, editors. Osteoporose: pour une prevention nutritionelle du risque?

Paris: Centre Recherche et Information Nutritionnelles; 1992. p. 117.

553. Nordin BE, Need AG, Morris HA, Horowitz M. The nature and significance of the relationship
between urinary sodium and urinary calcium in women. J Nutr. 1993;123:1615-22.

554. Kleeman CR, Bohannan J, Bernstein D, Long S, et al. Effect of variations in sodium intake
on calcium excretion in normal humans. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1964;115:29-32.

555. Heer M. Einfluss alimentaer erhoehter Kochsalzzufuhr auf den Wasser— und
Elektrolythaushalt des Menschen [dissertation]. Bonn, Germany: University of Bonn; 1996.

556. Agus ZS, Goldfarb S. Renal regulation of calcium balance. In: Seldin DW, Giebisch G,
editors. The kidney: physiology and pathophysiology. New York, NY: Raven Press; 1985.

p. 1323-35.

557. Constanzo LS, Windhager EE. Effects of PTH, ADH and cyclic AMP on distal tubular Ca
and Na reabsorption. Am J Physiol. 1980;239:F478-F85.

558. Meyer WJ, 3rd, Transbol I, Bartter FC, Delea G. Control of calcium absorption: effect
of sodium chloride loading and depletion. Metabolism. 1976;9:989-93.

559. Breslau MA, McGuire J, Zerwekh J, Pak CYC. The role of dietary sodium on renal excretion
and intestinal absorption of calcium and on vitamin D metabolism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1982;55:369-73.

560. Ginty F, Flynn A, Cashman KD. The effect of dietary sodium intake on biochemical markers
of bone metabolism in young women. Br J Nutr. 1998;79:343-50.

561. Lietz G, Avenell A, Robins SP. Short-term effects of dietary sodium intake on bone
metabolism in postmenopausal women measured using urinary deoxypyridinoline excretion.
Br J Nutr. 1997;78:73-82.

562. Blackwood AM, Sagnella GA, Cook DG, Cappuccio FP. Urinary calcium excretion, sodium
intake and blood pressure in a multi-ethnic population: results of the Wandsworth Heart
and Stroke Study. J Hum Hypertens. 2001 Apr;15(4):229-37.

563. Harrington M, Cashman KD. High salt intake appears to increase bone resorption in
postmenopausal women but high potassium intake ameliorates this adverse effect.

Nutr Rev. 2003 May;61(5 Pt 1):179-83.

564. Harrington M, Bennett T, Jakobsen J, Ovesen L, et al. The effect of a high-protein, high-
sodium diet on calcium and bone metabolism in postmenopausal women and its interaction
with vitamin D receptor genotype. Br J Nutr. 2004 Jan;91(1):41-51.

565. Harrington M, Bennett T, Jakobsen J, Ovesen L, et al. Effect of a high-protein, high-salt
diet on calcium and bone metabolism in postmenopausal women stratified by hormone
replacement therapy use. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2004 Oct;58(10):1436-9.

566. Massey LK, Whiting SJ. Dietary salt, urinary calcium, and stone risk. Nutr Rev. 1995;
53:131-9.

567. Massey LK, Whiting SJ. Dietary salt, urinary calcium, and bone loss. J Bone Miner Res.
1996;11:731-6.

568. Sellmeyer DE, Schloetter M, Sebastian A. Potassium citrate prevents increased urine calcium
excretion and bone resorption induced by a high sodium chloride diet. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2002 May;87(5):2008-12.

569. Nordin BE, Need AG, Steurer T, Morris HA, et al. Nutrition, osteoporosis, and aging.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998 Nov 20;854:336-51.

"
"126","570. Frassetto L, Morris RC, Jr, Sellmeyer DE, Todd K, et al. Diet, evolution and aging--the
pathophysiologic effects of the post-agricultural inversion of the potassium-to-sodium
and base-to-Chloride ratios in the human diet. Eur J Nutr. 2001 Oct;40(5):200—13.

571. de Wardener HE, MaCGregor GA. Harmful effects of dietary salt in addition to hypertension.
J Hum Hypertens. 2002 Apr;16(4):213-23.

572. Fellstrom B, Danielson BG, Karlstrom B, Lithe|| H, et al. Dietary habits in renal stone patients
compared with healthy subjects. Br J Urol. 1989;63:575-80.

573. Trinchieri A, Mandressi A, Luongo P, Longo G, et al. The influence of diet on urinary risk
factors for stones in healthy subjects and idiopathic renal calcium stone formers.

Br J Urol. 1991;67:230-6.

574. Sakhaee K, Harvey JA, Padalino PK, Whitson P, et al. The potential role of salt abuse
on the risk for kidney stone formation. J Urol. 1993;150(2 Pt 1):310—2.

575. Matkovic V, Ilich JZ, Andon MB, Hsieh LC, et al. Urinary calcium, sodium, and bone mass
of young females. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995;62:417.

576. Devine A, Criddle RA, Dick IM, Kerr DA, et al. A longitudinal study of the effect of sodium
and calcium intakes on regional bone density in postmenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr.
1995;62:740-5.

577. Frings—Meuthen P, Baecker N, Heer M. Low-grade metabolic acidosis may be the
cause of sodium chloride-induced exaggerated bone resorption. J Bone Miner Res.

2008 Apr;23(4):517-24.

578. Arnaud SB, Wolinsky I, Fung P, Vernikos J. Dietary salt and urinary calcium excretion
in a human bed rest spaceflight model. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2000;71:1115-9.

579. Frings P, Baecker N, Boese A, Heer M. High sodium chloride intake causes mild metabolic
acidosis: Is this the reason for increased bone resorption? FASEB J. 2005 Mar;19(5):A1345
(abstract #7452).

580. Frings P, Baecker N, Heer M. High sodium chloride intake exacerbates immobilisation
induced bone loss. FASEB J. 2007;21:Abstract 548.7. 581. May RC, Kelly RA, Mitch
WE. Metabolic acidosis stimulates protein degradation in rat muscle by a glucocorticoid-
dependent mechanism. J Clin Invest. 1986 Feb;77(2):614-21.

582. Buehlmeier J, Frings—Meuthen P, Remer T, Maser—Gluth C, et al. Alkaline salts to counteract
bone resorption and protein wasting induced by high salt intake: results of a randomized
controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Dec;97(12):4789-97.

583. Compston J. Management of glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol.
2010 Feb;6(2):82-8.

584. Cooper MS, Walker EA, Bland R, Fraser WD, et al. Expression and functional
consequences of 11beta—hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity in human bone.

Bone. 2000 Sep;27(3):375-81.

585. Dovio A, Perazzolo L, Osella G, Ventura M, et al. Immediate fall of bone formation
and transient increase of bone resorption in the course of high-dose, short-term
glucocorticoid therapy in young patients with multiple sclerosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2004 Oct;89(10):4923-8.

586. Kuroki Y, Kaji H, Kawano S, Kanda F, et al. Short-term effects of glucocorticoid therapy
on biochemical markers of bone metabolism in Japanese patients: a prospective study.

J Bone Miner Metab. 2008;26(3):271-8.

587. Frassetto LA, Morris RC, Jr, Sellmeyer DE, Sebastian A. Adverse effects of sodium chloride
on bone in the aging human population resulting from habitual consumption of typical
American diets. J Nutr. 2008 Feb;138(2):41QS-22S.

588. Burckhardt P. The effect of the alkali load of mineral water on bone metabolism:
interventional studies. J Nutr. 2008 Feb;138(2):435S—7S.

"
"127","589. Arnett TR. Extracellular pH regulates bone cell function. J Nutr. 2008 Feb;138(2):415S—8S.

590. Kleinman LI, Lorenz JM. Physiology and pathophysiology of body water and electrolytes.
In: Kaplan LA, Pesce AJ, editors. Clinical chemistry: theory, analysis, and correlation.

St. Louis, MO: CV Mosby Company; 1984. p. 363-86.

591. Alexander WC, Leach CS, Fischer CL. Clinical biochemistry. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein LF,
Berry CA, editors. Biomedical results of Apollo (NASA SP-368). Washington, DC: National
Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1975. p. 185-96.

592. Sawka MN, Coyle EF. Influence of body water and blood volume on thermoregulation
and exercise performance in the heat. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 1999;27:167-218.

593. Sullivan RJ, Jr. Accepting death without artificial nutrition or hydration. J Gen Intern Med.
1993 Apr;8(4):220-4.

594. Leach Huntoon CS, Grigoriev AI, Natochin YV. Fluid and electrolyte regulation in spaceflight.
San Diego: Univelt, Inc.; 1998.

595. Leach CS. A review of the consequences of fluid and electrolyte shifts in weightlessness.
Acta Astronaut. 1979;6:1123-35.

596. Leach CS. An overview of the endocrine and metabolic changes in manned space flight.
Acta Astronaut. 1981 ;8:977-86.

597. Leach CS. Fluid control mechanisms in weightlessness. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1987;58(9 Section ||):A74-9.

598. Leach CS, Johnson PC, Jr. Fluid and electrolyte control in simulated and actual spaceflight.
Physiologist. 1985;28(6 Suppl):S—34-S—7.

599. Drummer C, Gerzer R, Baisch F, Heer M. Body fluid regulation in micro-gravity differs from
that on Earth: an overview. Pflugers Arch. 2000;441(2-3 Suppl):R66-72.

600. De Santo NG, Christensen NJ, Drummer C, Kramer HJ, et al. Fluid balance and kidney
function in space: introduction. Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Sep;38(3):664-7.

601. Norsk P, Christensen NJ, Bie P, Gabrielsen A, et al. Unexpected renal responses in space.
Lancet. 2000 Nov 4;356(9241):1577-8.

602. Nicogossian AE, Sawin CF, Huntoon CL. Overall physiologic response to space flight.

In: Nicogossian AE, Huntoon CL, Pool SL, editors. Space physiology and medicine.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1994. p. 213-27.

603. Johnson P, Driscoll T, LeBlanc A. Blood volume changes. In: Johnston R, Dietlein L, editors.
Biomedical results from Skylab (NASA SP-377). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and
Space Administration; 1977. p. 235-41.

604. Bungo MW, Johnson PC, Jr. Cardiovascular examinations and observations of
deconditioning during the space shuttle orbital flight test program. Aviat Space Environ Med.
1983;54:1001-4.

605. Vernikos J, Convertino VA. Advantages and disadvantages of fludrocortisone or saline load
in preventing post-spaceflight orthostatic hypotension. Acta Astronaut. 1994;33:259-66.

606. Hyatt KH, West DA. Reversal of bedrest-induced orthostatic intolerance by lower body
negative pressure and saline. Aviat Space Environ Med. 1977 Feb;48(2):120-4.

607. Thornton WE, Ord J. Physiological mass measurements in Skylab. In: Johnston RS, Dietlein
LF, editors. Biomedical results from Skylab (NASA SP-377) Washington, DC: National
Aeronautics and Space Administration; 1977. p. 175-82.

608. Leach CS, Inners LD, Charles JB. Changes in total body water during spaceflight.

J Clin Pharmacol. 1991;31:1001-6.

609. Norsk P. Cardiovascular and fluid volume control in humans in space.

Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;6(4):325-30.

"
"128","610. Balakhovskiy I, Natochin Y. [Metabolism under the extreme conditions of spaceflight
and during its simulation]. Moscow: Nauka Press; 1973.

611. Gerzer R, Drummer C, Heer M. Antinatriuretic kidney response to weightlessness.

Acta Astronaut. 1994 Ju|;33:97-100.

612. Gerzer R, Heer M, Drummer C. Body fluid metabolism at actual and simulated microgravity.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1996;28(10 Suppl):S32-5.

613. Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Morukov BV, Sams CF. The risk of renal stone formation during
and after long duration space flight. Nephron. 2001 ;89:264-70.

614. Harm DL, Jennings RT, Meck JV, Powell MR, et al. Invited review: gender issues related
to spaceflight: a NASA perspective. J Appl Physiol. 2001 Nov;91(5):2374-83.

615. Greenleaf JE. Mechanisms for negative water balance during weightlessness: immersion
or bed rest? Physiologist. 1985;28(6 Suppl):S38-9.

616. Vernikos J. Metabolic and endocrine changes. In: Sandler H, Vernikos J, editors.
Inactivity: physiological effects. Orlando, FL: Academic Press, Inc.; 1986. p. 99-121.

617. Norsk P. Renal adjustments to microgravity. Pflugers Arch. 2000;441(2-3 Suppl):R62-5.

618. Norsk P, Christensen NJ, Vorobiev D, Suzuki Y, et al. Effects of head-down bed rest
& microgravity on renal fluid excretion. J Gravit Physiol. 1998 Ju|;5(1):P81-4.

619. Regnard J, Heer M, Drummer C, Norsk P. Validity of microgravity simulation models on earth.
Am J Kidney Dis. 2001 Sep;38(3):668-74.

620. Chylack LT, Jr., Feiveson AH, Peterson LE, Tung WH, et al. NASCA Report 2: longitudinal
study of relationship of exposure to space radiation and risk of lens opacity. Radiat Res.
2012 Jul;178(1):25-32.

621. Chylack LT, Jr., Peterson LE, Feiveson AH, Wear ML, et al. NASA study of cataract in
astronauts (NASCA). Report 1: cross-sectional study of the relationship of exposure to
space radiation and risk of lens opacity. Radiat Res. 2009 Jul;172(1):10-20.

622. Cucinotta FA, Manuel FK, Jones J, Iszard G, et al. Space radiation and cataracts
in astronauts. Radiat Res. 2001;156(5 Pt 1):460-6.

623. Mader TH, Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, et al. Optic disc edema, globe flattening,
choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts after Iong-duration space flight.
Ophthalmology. 2011 Oct;118(10):2058-69.

624. Mayasnikov VI, Stepanova SI. Features of cerebral hemodynamics in cosmonauts before
and after flight on the Mir Orbital Station. Orbital Station Mir Institute of Biomedical
Problems: State Scientific Center of Russian Federation; 2008. p. 300-5.

625. Nygard O, Vollset SE, Refsum H, Stensvold I, et al. Total plasma homocysteine and
cardiovascular risk profile. The Hordaland Homocysteine Study. JAMA. 1995 Nov 15;
274(19):1526-33.

626. Finkelstein JD. The metabolism of homocysteine: pathways and regulation. Eur J Pediatr.
1998 Apr;157 Suppl 2:S40-4.

627. Pizza V, Agresta A, Agresta A, Lamaida E, et al. Migraine and genetic polymorphisms:
an overview. Open Neurol J. 2012;6:65-70.

628. Homocysteine Studies Collaboration. Homocysteine and risk of ischemic heart disease
and stroke: a meta—analysis. JAMA. 2002 Oct 23-30;288(16):2015-22.

629. Ebrahimi KB, Handa JT. Lipids, lipoproteins, and age-related macular degeneration. J Lipids.
2011;2011:802059. doi: 10.1155/2011/802059. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

630. Burgansky-Eliash Z, Barash H, Nelson D, Grinvald A, et al. Retinal blood flow velocity in
patients with age-related macular degeneration. Curr Eye Res. 2014 Mar;39(3):304-11.

631. Evans J. Should we be taking B vitamins to prevent age-related macular degeneration?
Not yet, but worth doing more research. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Ju|;98(1):4-5.

"
"129","632. Chu C, Scanlon P. Vitamin B12 deficiency optic neuropathy detected by asymptomatic
screening. BMJ Case Rep. 2011 Apr 26;2011. pii: bcr0220113823. doi: 10.1136/
bcr.02.2011:3823.

633. Jalil A, Usmani HA, Khan MI, Blakely EL, et al. Bilateral paediatric optic neuropathy
precipitated by vitamin B12 deficiency and a novel mitochondrial DNA mutation.

Int Ophthalmol. 2013 Dec;33(6):687-90.

634. Gopinath B, Flood VM, Rochtchina E, Wang JJ, et al. Homocysteine, folate, vitamin B-12,
and 10-y incidence of age-related macular degeneration. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Jul;
98(1):129-35.

635. Sekeryapan B, Oner V, Kirbas A, Turkyilmaz K, et al. Plasma homocysteine levels in
dry eye patients. Cornea. 2013 May;32(5):e94-6.

636. Xu F, Zhao X, Zeng SM, Li L, et al. Homocysteine, B vitamins, methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase gene, and risk of primary open-angle glaucoma: a meta—analysis. Ophthalmology.
2012 Dec;119(12):2493-9.

637. Rochtchina E, Wang JJ, Flood VM, Mitchell P. Elevated serum homocysteine, low serum
vitamin B12, folate, and age-related macular degeneration: the Blue Mountains Eye Study.
Am J Ophthalmol. 2007 Feb;143(2):344-6.

638. Christen WG, Glynn RJ, Chew EY, Albert CM, et al. Folic acid, pyridoxine, and
cyanocobalamin combination treatment and age-related macular degeneration in women:
the Women's Antioxidant and Folic Acid Cardiovascular Study. Arch Intern Med.

2009 Feb 23;169(4):335-41.

639. Bailey LB, Gregory ||| JF. Folate. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge
in nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 2006. p. 278-301.

640. Groff J, Gropper S. Advanced nutrition and human metabolism. 3rd ed. St. Paul, MN:
Wadsworth Publishing; 2000.

641. Herbert V. Development of human folate deficiency. In: Picciano MF, Sotokstad ELR,
Gregory JFI, editors. Folic acid metabolism in health and disease. New York: Wiley-Liss;
1990. p. 195-210.

642. Herbert V. Folic acid. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, Ross AC, editors. Modern nutrition
in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999.

643. Endoh K, Murakami M, Araki R, Maruyama C, et al. Low folate status increases
chromosomal damage by X-ray irradiation. Int J Radiat Biol. 2006 Apr;82(4):223-30.

644. Endoh K, Murakami M, Umegaki K. Vulnerability of folate in plasma and bone marrow
to total body irradiation in mice. Int J Radiat Biol. 2007 Jan;83(1):65-71.

645. Beetstra S, Thomas P, Salisbury C, Turner J, et al. Folic acid deficiency increases
chromosomal instability, chromosome 21 aneuploidy and sensitivity to radiation-induced
micronuclei. Mutat Res. 2005 Oct 15;578(1-2):317-26.

646. Courtemanche C, Huang AC, EIson-Schwab I, Kerry N, et al. Folate deficiency and ionizing
radiation cause DNA breaks in primary human lymphocytes: a comparison. FASEB J.
2004 Jan;18(1):209-11.

647. Joshi R, Adhikari S, Patro BS, Chattopadhyay S, et al. Free radical scavenging behavior
of folic acid: evidence for possible antioxidant activity. Free Radic Biol Med. 2001 Jun 15;
30(12):1390-9.

648. Shin YS, Beuhring KU, Stokstad EL. The relationships between vitamin B12 and folic acid
and the effect of methionine on folate metabolism. Mol Cell Biochem. 1975 Nov 14;
9(2):97-108.

649. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin
B6, folate, vitamin B12, pantothenic acid, biotin, and choline. Washington, DC:

National Academies Press; 1998.

"
"130","650. van Asselt DZ, van den Broek WJ, Lamers CB, Corstens FH, et al. Free and protein-bound
cobalamin absorption in healthy middle-aged and older subjects. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1996
Aug;44(8):949-53.

651. Stabler SP. Vitamin B12. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006.

p. 302-13.

652. Camporeale G, Zempleni J. Biotin. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge
in nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006.

p. 314-26.

653. Mock DM, Malik MI. Distribution of biotin in human plasma: most of the biotin is not bound
to protein. Am J Clin Nutr. 1992 Aug;56(2):427-32.

654. Mock DM, Stadler DD, Stratton SL, Mock NI. Biotin status assessed longitudinally
in pregnant women. J Nutr. 1997 May;127(5):710-6.

655. Krause KH, Bonjour JP, Berlit P, Kynast G, et al. Effect of Iong-term treatment with
antiepileptic drugs on the vitamin status. Drug Nutr Interact. 1988;5(4):317-43.

656. Rathman SC, Gregory JF, 3rd, McMahon RJ. Pharmacological biotin supplementation
maintains biotin status and function in rats administered dietary carbamazepine. J Nutr.
2003 Sep;133(9):2857-62.

657. Maeda Y, Kawata S, Inui Y, Fukuda K, et al. Biotin deficiency decreases ornithine
transcarbamylase activity and mRNA in rat liver. J Nutr. 1996 Jan;126(1):61-6.

658. Borboni P, Magnaterra R, Rabini RA, Staffolani R, et al. Effect of biotin on glucokinase
activity, mRNA expression and insulin release in cultured beta—cells. Acta Diabetol.

1996 Jul;33(2):154-8.

659. Dakshinamurti K, Li W. Transcriptional regulation of liver phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
by biotin in diabetic rats. Mol Cell Biochem. 1994 Mar 30;132(2):127-32.

660. Whatham A, Bartlett H, Eperjesi F, Blumenthal C, et al. Vitamin and mineral deficiencies
in the developed world and their effect on the eye and vision. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt.

2008 Jan;28(1):1-12.

661. van Poppel G, Goldbohm RA. Epidemiologic evidence for beta—carotene and cancer
prevention. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995;62 Suppl:1393S—402S.

662. Kohlmeier L, Hastings SB. Epidemiologic evidence of a role of carotenoids in cardiovascular
disease prevention. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995;62 Suppl:137OS—6S.

663. Olson JA. Vitamin A, retinoids, and carotenoids. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, editors.
Modern nutrition in health and disease. 8th ed. Malvern, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1994.

p. 287-307.

664. Michaelsson K, Lithe|| H, Vessby B, Melhus H. Serum retinol levels and the risk of fracture.
N Engl J Med. 2003 Jan 23;348(4):287-94.

665. Melhus H, Michaelsson K, Kindmark A, Bergstrom R, et al. Excessive dietary intake of
vitamin A is associated with reduced bone mineral density and increased risk for hip fracture.
Ann Intern Med. 1998 Nov 15;129(10):770-8.

666. Jackson HA, Sheehan AH. Effect of vitamin A on fracture risk. Ann Pharmacother.

2005 Dec;39(12):2086-90.

667. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, et al. Risk factors for lung cancer and
for intervention effects in CARET, the Beta—Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 1996 Nov 6;88(21):1550-9.

668. ATBC Cancer Prevention Study Group. The alpha—tocopherol, beta—carotene lung
cancer prevention study: design, methods, participant Characteristics, and compliance.

Ann Epidemiol. 1994 Jan;4(1):1-10.

"
"131","669. Rastegar N, Eckart P, Mertz M. Radiation-induced cataract in astronauts and cosmonauts.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2002 Ju|;240(7):543-7.

670. Jones JA, McCarten M, Manuel K, Djojonegoro B, et al. Cataract formation mechanisms and
risk in aviation and space crews. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2007 Apr;78(4 Suppl):A56-66.

671. Agte V, Tarwadi K. The importance of nutrition in the prevention of ocular disease with
special reference to cataract. Ophthalmic Res. 2010;44(3):166-72.

672. Cui YH, Jing CX, Pan HW. Association of blood antioxidants and vitamins with risk
of age-related cataract: a meta—analysis of observational studies. Am J Clin Nutr.
2013 Sep;98(3):778-86.

673. Beisel WR. History of nutritional immunology: introduction and overview. J Nutr.
1992 Mar;122(3 Suppl):591-6.

674. Mizock BA. Immunonutrition and critical illness: an update. Nutrition.
2010 JuI-Aug;26(7-8):701-7.

675. Cunningham-Rundles S, McNeeley DF, Moon A. Mechanisms of nutrient modulation
of the immune response. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2005 Jun;115(6):1119-28; quiz 29.

676. Chandra RK, Kumari S. Effects of nutrition on the immune system. Nutrition.
1994 May-Jun;10(3):207-10.

677. Chandra RK. Nutrient regulation of immune functions. Forum Nutr. 2003;56:147-8.

678. Chandra RK. Nutrition and the immune system: an introduction. Am J Clin Nutr.
1997 Aug;66(2):46OS-3S.

679. Keith ME, Jeejeebhoy KN. Immunonutrition. Baillieres Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1997 Dec;11(4):709-38.

680. Wintergerst ES, Maggini S, Hornig DH. Contribution of selected vitamins and trace elements
to immune function. Ann Nutr Metab. 2007;51(4):301-23.

681. Sonnenfeld G. The immune system in space, including Earth-based benefits of space-based
research. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;6(4):343-9.

682. Sonnenfeld G, Shearer WT. Immune function during space flight. Nutrition.
2002 Oct;18(10):899-903.

683. Stein TP. Space flight and oxidative stress. Nutrition. 2002 Oct;18(10):867-71.

684. Stein TP, Leskiw MJ. Oxidant damage during and after spaceflight. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab. 2000 Mar;278(3):E375-82.

685. Stein TP, Gaprindashvili T. Spaceflight and protein metabolism, with special reference
to humans. Am J Clin Nutr. 1994 Nov;60(5):806S—19S.

686. Chandra RK, Chandra S, Gupta S. Antibody affinity and immune complexes after
immunization with tetanus toxoid in protein-energy malnutrition. Am J Clin Nutr.
1984 Jul;40(1):131-4.

687. Guadagni M, Biolo G. Effects of inflammation and/or inactivity on the need for dietary
protein. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2009 Nov;12(6):617-22.

688. Kirk SJ, Barbul A. Role of arginine in trauma, sepsis, and immunity. JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr. 1990 Sep-Oct;14(5 Suppl):226S—9S.

689. Kirk SJ, Hurson M, Regan MC, Holt DR, et al. Arginine stimulates wound healing and
immune function in elderly human beings. Surgery. 1993 Aug;114(2):155-9; discussion 60.

690. Singleton KD, Wischmeyer PE. Glutamine attenuates inflammation and NF-kappaB activation
via Cullin-1 deneddylation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 29;373(3):445-9.

691. Wischmeyer PE. Glutamine: role in critical illness and ongoing clinical trials. Curr Opin
Gastroenterol. 2008 Mar;24(2):190-7.

"
"132","692. Wischmeyer PE. Glutamine: mode of action in critical illness. Crit Care Med.
2007 Sep;35(9 Suppl):S541-4.

693. Mondello S, Italiano D, Giacobbe MS, Mondello P, et al. GIutamine-supplemented total
parenteral nutrition improves immunological status in anorectic patients. Nutrition.
2010 Jun;26(6):677-81.

694. Novak F, Heyland DK, Avenell A, Drover JW, et al. Glutamine supplementation in serious
illness: a systematic review of the evidence. Crit Care Med. 2002 Sep;30(9):2022-9.

695. van Etten E, Mathieu C. Immunoregulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3: basic concepts.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Oct;97(1-2):93-101.

696. Mathieu C, Adorini L. The coming of age of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) analogs
as immunomodulatory agents. Trends Mol Med. 2002 Apr;8(4):174-9.

697. Hewison M, Freeman L, Hughes SV, Evans KN, et al. Differential regulation of vitamin D
receptor and its ligand in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 1;
170(11):5382-90.

698. Martineau AR, Wilkinson KA, Newton SM, Floto RA, et al. IFN-gamma- and TNF-independent
vitamin D-inducible human suppression of mycobacteria: the role of cathelicidin LL-37.

J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):7190-8.

699. Martineau AR, Wilkinson RJ, Wilkinson KA, Newton SM, et al. A single dose of vitamin D
enhances immunity to mycobacteria. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007 Jul 15;176(2):208—13.

700. Kondo Y, Kato T, Kimura O, Iwata T, et al. 1(OH) vitamin D3 supplementation improves the
sensitivity of the immune-response during Peg-IFN/RBV therapy in chronic hepatitis C
patients—case controlled trial. PLoS One. 2013;8(5):e63672.

701. Chouker A. Stress challenges and immunity in space: from mechanisms to monitoring
and preventive strategies. Berlin: Springer; 2012.

702. Tamura J, Kubota K, Murakami H, Sawamura M, et al. Immunomodulation by vitamin B12:
augmentation of CD8+ T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cell activity in vitamin B12-
deficient patients by methyI-B12 treatment. Clin Exp Immunol. 1999 Apr;116(1):28—32.

703. Bunout D, Barrera G, Hirsch S, Gattas V, et al. Effects of a nutritional supplement on the
immune response and cytokine production in free-Iiving Chilean elderly. JPEN J Parenter
Enteral Nutr. 2004 Sep-Oct;28(5):348—54.

704. Maggini S, Wintergerst ES, Beveridge S, Hornig DH. Selected vitamins and trace elements
support immune function by strengthening epithelial barriers and cellular and humoral
immune responses. Br J Nutr. 2007 Oct;98 Suppl 1:S29-35.

705. Heer M, Baisch F, Kropp J, Gerzer R, et al. High dietary sodium chloride consumption
may not induce body fluid retention in humans. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000
Apr;278(4):F585-95.

706. Titze J, Lang R, ||ies C, Schwind KH, et al. Osmotically inactive skin Na+ storage in rats.
Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2003 Dec;285(6):F1108—17.

707. Marvar PJ, Gordon FJ, Harrison DG. Blood pressure control: salt gets under your skin.

Nat Med. 2009 May;15(5):487-8.
708. Chen Q, Ross AC. Vitamin A and immune function: retinoic acid modulates population
dynamics in antigen receptor and CD38—stimulated splenic B cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 4;102(40):14142-9.
709. Ross AC. Vitamin A and retinoic acid in T ceII-related immunity. Am J Clin Nutr.
2012 Nov;96(5):1166S—72S.
710. Ross AC. Vitamin A status: relationship to immunity and the antibody response.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1992 Ju|;200(3):303-20.
711. Stephensen CB. Vitamin A, infection, and immune function. Annu Rev Nutr. 2001 ;21 :167-92.

"
"133","712. Stephensen CB. Examining the effect of a nutrition intervention on immune function in
healthy humans: what do we mean by immune function and who is really healthy anyway?
Am J Clin Nutr. 2001 Nov;74(5):565-6.

713. Semba RD. The role of vitamin A and related retinoids in immune function. Nutr Rev.

1998 Jan;56(1 Pt 2):S38-48.

714. Field CJ, Johnson IR, Schley PD. Nutrients and their role in host resistance to infection.
J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Jan;71(1):16-32.

715. Schwager J, Schulze J. Modulation of interleukin production by ascorbic acid.

Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1998 Jun 30;64(1):45-57.

716. Jeng KC, Yang CS, Siu WY, Tsai YS, et al. Supplementation with vitamins C and E enhances
cytokine production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells in healthy adults. Am J Clin Nutr.
1996 Dec;64(6):960-5.

717. Park OJ, Kim HY, Kim WK, Kim YJ, et al. Effect of vitamin E supplementation on antioxidant
defense systems and humoral immune responses in young, middle-aged and elderly Korean
women. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2003 Apr;49(2):94-9.

718. Wintergerst ES, Maggini S, Hornig DH. Immune-enhancing role of vitamin C and zinc
and effect on clinical conditions. Ann Nutr Metab. 2006;50(2):85-94.

719. Chung S, Yao H, Caito S, Hwang JW, et al. Regulation of S|RT1 in cellular functions: role
of polyphenols. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Sep 1;501(1):79-90.

720. Perron NR, Brumaghim JL. A review of the antioxidant mechanisms of polyphenol
compounds related to iron binding. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2009;53(2):75-100.

721. Gao X, Deeb D, Media J, Divine G, et al. Immunomodulatory activity of resveratrol:
discrepant in vitro and in vivo immunological effects. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Dec 15;
66(12):2427-35.

722. Park HJ, Lee CM, Jung ID, Lee JS, et al. Quercetin regulates Th1/Th2 balance in a murine
model of asthma. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Mar;9(3):261-7.

723. Sharma S, Chopra K, Kulkarni SK, Agrewala JN. Resveratrol and curcumin suppress immune
response through CD28/CTLA-4 and CD80 co-stimulatory pathway. Clin Exp Immunol.
2007 Jan;147(1):155-63.

724. Shim JH, Choi HS, Pugliese A, Lee SY, et al. (-)-Epiga||ocatechin gallate regulates
CD3-mediated T cell receptor signaling in leukemia through the inhibition of ZAP-70 kinase.
J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 17;283(42):28370-9.

725. Singh NP, Hegde VL, Hofseth LJ, Nagarkatti M, et al. Resveratrol (trans—3,5,4'-
trihydroxystilbene) ameliorates experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, primarily
via induction of apoptosis in T cells involving activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
and estrogen receptor. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Dec;72(6):1508-21.

726. Song EK, Hur H, Han MK. Epigallocatechin gallate prevents autoimmune diabetes induced
by multiple low doses of streptozotocin in mice. Arch Pharm Res. 2003 Jul;26(7):559-63.

727. Ganz T. Hepcidin--a peptide hormone at the interface of innate immunity and iron
metabolism. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2006;306:183-98.

728. Ganz T. Hepcidin and iron regulation, 10 years later. Blood. 2011 Apr 28;117(17):4425-33.

729. Lee P, Peng H, Gelbart T, Wang L, et al. Regulation of hepcidin transcription by interleukin-1
and interleukin-6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 8;102(6):1906-10.

730. Nemeth E, Rivera S, Gabayan V, Keller C, et al. |L-6 mediates hypoferremia of inflammation
by inducing the synthesis of the iron regulatory hormone hepcidin. J Clin Invest.

2004 May;113(9):1271-6.

731. Vanamala J, Glagolenko A, Yang P, Carroll RJ, et al. Dietary fish oil and pectin enhance
colonocyte apoptosis in part through suppression of PPARdeIta/PGE2 and elevation
of PGE3. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Apr;29(4):790-6.

"
"134","732. Camandola S, Leonarduzzi G, Musso T, Varesio L, et al. Nuclear factor k8 is activated
by arachidonic acid but not by eicosapentaenoic acid. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
1996 Dec 13;229(2):643-7.

733. Kang JX, Weylandt KH. Modulation of inflammatory cytokines by omega—3 fatty acids.
Subcell Biochem. 2008;49:133-43.

734. Kim HH, Lee Y, Eun HC, Chung JH. Eicosapentaenoic acid inhibits TNF-alpha—induced
matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression in human keratinocytes, HaCaT cells. Biochem
Biophys Res Comm. 2008 Apr 4;368(2):343-9.

735. Magee P, Pearson S, Allen J. The omega—3 fatty acid, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), prevents
the damaging effects of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a|pha during murine skeletal muscle
cell differentiation. Lipids Health Dis. 2008;7:24.

736. Powers SK, Jackson MJ. Exercise-induced oxidative stress: cellular mechanisms and
impact on muscle force production. Physiol Rev. 2008 Oct;88(4):1243-76.

737. Azzam El, Jay-Gerin JP, Pain D. Ionizing radiation-induced metabolic oxidative stress
and prolonged cell injury. Cancer Lett. 2012 Dec 31 ;327(1-2):48—60.

738. Li M, Gonon G, Buonanno M, Autsavapromporn N, et al. Health risks of space exploration:
targeted and nontargeted oxidative injury by high-charge and high-energy particles.
Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 Mar 20;20(9):1501-23.

739. Gernhardt ML, Jones JA, Scheuring RA, Abercromby AF, et al. Risk of compromised EVA
performance and crew health due to inadequate EVA suit systems. In: McPhee JS, Charles
JB, editors. Human health and performance risks of space exploration missions: evidence
reviewed by the NASA Human Research Program. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office; 2009. p. 333-58.

740. Norcross J, Norsk P, Law J, Arias D, et al. Effects of the 8 psia / 32% O2 atmosphere
on the human in the spaceflight environment. Hanover, MD: NASA Center for AeroSpace
Information; 2013.

741. National Aeronautics and Space Administration Johnson Space Center. Nutritional
requirements for Extended Duration Orbiter missions (30-90 d) and Space Station Freedom
(30-120 d). Houston, TX: National Aeronautics and Space Administration Lyndon B. Johnson
Space Center;1993. Report No.: JSC-32283.

742. Reid MB. Muscle fatigue: mechanisms and regulation. In: Sen CK, Packer L, Hénninen O,
editors. Handbook of oxidants and antioxidants in exercise. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
B.\/.; 2000. p. 599-630.

743. Upton AC. The biological effects of Iow-Ievel ionizing radiation. Sci Am. 1982;246(2):41-9.

744. O'Neill CA, Stebbins CL, Bonigut S, Halliwell B, et al. Production of hydroxyl radicals
in contracting skeletal muscle of cats. J Appl Physiol. 1996 Sep;81(3):1197—206.

745. Reid MB, Khawli FA, Moody MR. Reactive oxygen in skeletal muscle. |||. Contractility
of unfatigued muscle. J Appl Physiol. 1993 Sep;75(3):1081-7.

746. Essig DA, Nosek TM. Muscle fatigue and induction of stress protein genes: a dual function
of reactive oxygen species? Can J Appl Physiol. 1997 Oct;22(5):409-28.

747. Lawler JM, Cline CC, Hu Z, Coast JR. Effect of oxidant challenge on contractile function
of the aging rat diaphragm. Am J Physiol. 1997 Feb;272(2 Pt 1):E201-7.

748. Jones JA, Riggs PK, Yang TC, Pedemonte CH, et al. Ionizing radiation-induced bioeffects
in space and strategies to reduce cellular injury and carcinogenesis. Aviat Space Environ
Med. 2007 Apr;78(4 Suppl):A67—78.

749. Kennedy AR, Ware JH, Guan J, Donahue JJ, et al. Selenomethionine protects against
adverse biological effects induced by space radiation. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Jan 15;
36(2):259-66.

"
"135","750. Little JB. Radiation carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2000 Mar;21(3):397-404.

751. Mao XW, Pecaut MJ, Stodieck LS, Ferguson VL, et al. Spaceflight environment induces
mitochondrial oxidative damage in ocular tissue. Radiat Res. 2013 Oct;180(4):340-50.

752. Rizzo AM, Corsetto PA, Montorfano G, Milani S, et al. Effects of Iong-term space flight
on erythrocytes and oxidative stress of rodents. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32361.

753. Baqai FP, Gridley DS, Slater JM, Luo-Owen X, et al. Effects of spaceflight on innate immune
function and antioxidant gene expression. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009 Jun;106(6):1935-42.

754. Gridley DS, Slater JM, Luo-Owen X, Rizvi A, et al. Spaceflight effects on T lymphocyte
distribution, function and gene expression. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009 Jan;106(1):194-202.

755. Zwart SR, Kala G, Smith SM. Body iron stores and oxidative damage in humans increased
during and after a 10- to 12-day undersea dive. J Nutr. 2009 Jan;139(1):90-5.

756. Zezerov AE, Ivanova SM, Morukov BV, Ushakov AS. [Lipid peroxidation in the human blood
during a 120-day period of anti-orthostatic hypokinesia]. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med.

1989 Mar—Apr;23(2):28-33.

757. Pross HD, Casares A, Kiefer J. Induction and repair of DNA double-strand breaks under
irradiation and microgravity. Radiat Res. 2000 May;153(5 Pt 1):521-5.

758. Kiefer J, Pross HD. Space radiation effects and microgravity. Mutat Res. 1999 Dec 6;
430(2):299-305.

759. Hollander J, Gore M, Fiebig R, Mazzeo R, et al. Spaceflight downregulates antioxidant
defense systems in rat liver. Free Radic Biol Med. 1998 Jan 15;24(2):385-90.

760. Sunde RA. Selenium. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge in nutrition.
9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006. p. 480-97.

761. Traber MG. Vitamin E. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M, Ross AC, editors. Modern nutrition
in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 347-62.

762. Institute of Medicine. Dietary reference intakes for vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, and
carotenoids. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2000.

763. Fang Y, Yang S, Wu G. Free radicals, antioxidants, and nutrition. Nutrition. 2002;18:872-9.

764. Pence BC, Yang TC. Antioxidants: radiation and stress. In: Lane HW, Schoeller DA, editors.
Nutrition in spaceflight and weightlessness models. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2000.

p. 233-52.

765. Klein EA, Thompson IM Jr, Tangen CM, Crowley JJ, et al. Vitamin E and the risk of prostate
cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA. 2011 Oct 12;
306(14):1549-56.

766. Sayin VI, Ibrahim MX, Larsson E, Nilsson JA, et al. Antioxidants accelerate lung cancer
progression in mice. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jan 29;6(221):221ra15.

767. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud C. Antioxidant supplements and mortality. Curr Opin Clin
Nutr Metab Care. 2014 Jan;17(1):40-4.

768. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud C. Meta—regression analyses, meta—analyses, and trial
sequential analyses of the effects of supplementation with beta—carotene, vitamin A, and
vitamin E singly or in different combinations on all-cause mortality: do we have evidence
for lack of harm? PLoS One. 2013;8(9):e74558.

769. Johnston CS. Vitamin C. In: Bowman BA, Russell RM, editors. Present knowledge
in nutrition. 9th ed. Washington, DC: International Life Sciences Institute Press; 2006.

p. 233-41.

770. Sahni S, Hannah MT, Gagnon D, Blumberg J, et al. High vitamin C intake is associated

with lower 4-year bone loss in elderly men. J Nutr. 2008 Oct;138(10):1931-8.

"
"136","771. New SA, Robins SP, Campbell MK, Martin JC, et al. Dietary influences on bone mass
and bone metabolism: further evidence of a positive link between fruit and vegetable
consumption and bone health? Am J Clin Nutr. 2000 Jan;71(1):142-51.

772. New SA, Bolton-Smith C, Grubb DA, Reid DM. Nutritional influences on bone mineral
density: a cross-sectional study in premenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997
Jun;65(6):1831-9.

773. Macdonald HM, Black AJ, Aucott L, Duthie G, et al. Effect of potassium citrate
supplementation or increased fruit and vegetable intake on bone metabolism in healthy
postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Aug;
88(2):465-74.

774. Masse PG, Jougleux JL, Tranchant CC, Dosy J, et al. Enhancement of calcium/vitamin D
supplement efficacy by administering concomitantly three key nutrients essential to bone
collagen matrix for the treatment of osteopenia in middle-aged women: a one-year follow-
up. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2010 Jan;46(1):20—9.

775. Sahni S, Hannah MT, Gagnon D, Blumberg J, et al. Protective effect of total and
supplemental vitamin C intake on the risk of hip fracture--a 17-year follow-up from
the Framingham Osteoporosis Study. Osteoporos Int. 2009 Nov;20(11):1853-61.

776. Morton DJ, Barrett-Connor EL, Schneider DL. Vitamin C supplement use and bone mineral
density in postmenopausal women. J Bone Miner Res. 2001 Jan;16(1):135-40.

777. Hall SL, Greendale GA. The relation of dietary vitamin C intake to bone mineral density:
results from the PEPI study. Calcif Tissue Int. 1998 Sep;63(3):183-9.

778. Thompson J. Vitamins, minerals and supplements 5: overview of vitamin C. Community
Pract. 2007 Jan;80(1):35-6.

779. Yoshida M, Takashima Y, Inoue M, Iwasaki M, et al. Prospective study showing that dietary
vitamin C reduced the risk of age-related cataracts in a middle-aged Japanese population.
Eur J Nutr. 2007 Mar;46(2):118-24.

780. Watters JL, Satia JA, Kupper LL, Swenberg JA, et al. Associations of antioxidant nutrients
and oxidative DNA damage in healthy African-American and White adults. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Ju|;16(7):1428-36.

781. Henshall JD. The effect of processing on the nutritive value of fruit and vegetable products.
Proc Nutr Soc. 1973 May;32(1):17-22.

782. Fan X, Thayer DW. gamma—Radiation influences browning, antioxidant activity, and
malondialdehyde level of apple juice. J Agric Food Chem. 2002 Feb 13;50(4):710—5.

783. Salem SA. Effect of gamma radiation on the storage of onions used in the dehydration
industry. J Sci Food Agric. 1974 Mar;25(3):257-62.

784. Calucci L, Pinzino C, Zandomeneghi M, Capocchi A, et al. Effects of gamma—irradiation
on the free radical and antioxidant contents in nine aromatic herbs and spices.

J Agric Food Chem. 2003 Feb 12;51(4):927-34.

785. Cooper M, Perchonok M, Koslovsky M, Smith SM, et al. International Space Station menu
micronutrient concentration and stability. in review.

786. Jagetia GC, Rajanikant GK, Baliga MS, Rae KV, et al. Augmentation of wound healing
by ascorbic acid treatment in mice exposed to gamma—radiation. Int J Radiat Biol.

2004 May;80(5):347-54.

787. Cai L, Koropatnick J, Cherian MG. Roles of vitamin C in radiation-induced DNA damage
in presence and absence of copper. Chem Biol Interact. 2001 Jul 31 ;137(1):75-88.

788. Buettner GR, Jurkiewicz BA. Catalytic metals, ascorbate and free radicals: combinations
to avoid. Radiat Res. 1996 May;145(5):532-41.

789. Polivkova Z, Smerak P, Demova H, Houska M. Antimutagenic effects of lycopene and tomato
puree. J Med Food. 2010 Dec;13(6):1443-50.

"
"137","790. Basu A, Imrhan V. Tomatoes versus lycopene in oxidative stress and carcinogenesis:
conclusions from clinical trials. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2007 Mar;61(3):295-303.

791. Hoshi T, Tian Y, Xu R, Heinemann SH, et al. Mechanism of the modulation of BK potassium
channel complexes with different auxiliary subunit compositions by the omega—3 fatty acid
DHA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4822-7.

792. Hoshi T, Wissuwa B, Tian Y, Tajima N, et al. Omega—3 fatty acids lower blood pressure
by directly activating large-conductance Ca2+-dependent K+ channels. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2013 Mar19;110(12):4816-21.

793. Nicastro HL, Dunn BK. Selenium and prostate cancer prevention: insights from the Selenium
and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). Nutrients. 2013;5(4):1122-48.

794. Dunn BK, Richmond ES, Minasian LM, Ryan AM, et al. A nutrient approach to prostate
cancer prevention: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT).

Nutr Cancer. 2010;62(7):896-918.

795. Sesso HD, Buring JE, Christen WG, Kurth T, et al. Vitamins E and C in the prevention of
cardiovascular disease in men: the Physicians' Health Study || randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2008 Nov 12;300(18):2123-33.

796. Smith SM, Davis—Street J, Rice BL, Lane HW. Nutrition in space. Nutrition Today.

1997 Jan-Feb;32(1):6-12.

797. American Dietetic Association. Position of the American Dietetic Association: fortification
and nutritional supplements. J Am Diet Assoc. 2005 Aug;105(8):1300-11.

798. Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, Balmes J, Cullen MR, et al. The Beta—Carotene and Retinol
Efficacy Trial: incidence of lung cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality during 6-year
follow-up after stopping beta—carotene and retinol supplements. J Natl Cancer Inst.

2004 Dec 1;96(23):1743-50.

799. Hardman J, Limbird L. Goodman and Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics.
New York: McGraw Hill; 1996.

800. Guengerich FP, Miller GP, Hanna IH, Martin MV, et al. Diversity in the oxidation of substrates
by cytochrome P450 2D6: lack of an obligatory role of aspartate 301 -substrate electrostatic
bonding. Biochemistry (Mose). 2002 Sep 10;41(36):11025-34.

801. Utermohlen V. Diet, nutrition, and drug interactions. In: Shils ME, Olson JA, Shike M,

Ross AC, editors. Modern nutrition in health and disease. 9th ed. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1998.

802. Guengerich FP. Influence of nutrients and other dietary materials on cytochrome P-450
enzymes. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995 Mar;61(3 Suppl):651S—8S.

803. Bailey DG, Spence JD, Edgar B, Bayliff CD, et al. Ethanol enhances the hemodynamic
effects of felodipine. Clin Invest Med. 1989 Dec;12(6):357-62.

804. Kane GC, Lipsky JJ. Drug-grapefruit juice interactions. Mayo Clin Proc. 2000 Sep;
75(9):933-42.

805. Lown KS, Bailey DG, Fontana RJ, Janardan SK, et al. Grapefruit juice increases felodipine
oral availability in humans by decreasing intestinal CYP3A protein expression. J Clin Invest.
1997 May 15;99(10):2545-53.

806. Lundahl J, Regardh CG, Edgar B, Johnsson G. Relationship between time of intake of
grapefruit juice and its effect on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of felodipine
in healthy subjects. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1995;49(1-2):61-7.

807. Piver B, Berthou F, Dreano Y, Lucas D. Inhibition of CYP3A, CYP1A and CYP2E1 activities
by resveratrol and other non volatile red wine components. Toxicol Lett. 2001 Dec 15;
125(1-3):83-91.

808. Chan WK, Nguyen LT, Miller VP, Harris RZ. Mechanism-based inactivation of human
cytochrome P450 3A4 by grapefruit juice and red wine. Life Sci. 1998;62(10):PL135-42.

"
"138","809. Roby CA, Anderson GD, Kantor E, Dryer DA, et al. St John's Wort: effect on CYP3A4 activity.
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2000 May;67(5):451-7.

810. Fujita K. Food-drug interactions via human cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A). Drug Metabol
Drug Interact. 2004;20(4):195-217.

811. Fagan TC, Walle T, Oexmann MJ, Walle UK, et al. Increased clearance of propranolol and
theophylline by high-protein compared with high-carbohydrate diet. Clin Pharmacol Ther.
1987 Apr;41(4):402—6.

812. Saarem K, Pedersen JI. Sex differences in the hydroxylation of cholecalciferol and of 5 beta-
Cholestane-3 alpha, 7 alpha, 12 alpha—triol in rat liver. Biochem J. 1987 Oct 1;247(1):73-8.

813. Gupta RP, Hollis BW, Patel SB, Patrick KS, et al. CYP3A4 is a human microsomal vitamin D
25-hydroxylase. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Apr;19(4):680—8.

814. Schuster I, Egger H, Reddy GS, Vorisek G. Combination of vitamin D metabolites with
selective inhibitors of vitamin D metabolism. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2003;164:169-88.

815. Pascussi JM, Robert A, Nguyen M, Walrant-Debray O, et al. Possible involvement
of pregnane X receptor—enhanced CYP24 expression in drug-induced osteomalacia.

J Clin Invest. 2005 Jan;115(1):177-86.

816. Self TH, Chrisman CR, Baciewicz AM, Bronze MS. Isoniazid drug and food interactions.
Am J Med Sci. 1999 May;317(5):304-11.

817. Shah SC, Sharma RK, Hemangini, Chitle AR. Rifampicin induced osteomalacia. Tubercle.
1981 Sep;62(3):207-9.

818. Goraya JS, Gupta PN, Gupta RK, Bahadur R, et al. Anticonvulsant induced osteomalacia.
Indian Pediatr. 2000 Mar;37(3):325-9.

819. Chen H, Howald WN, Juchau MR. Biosynthesis of all-trans—retinoic acid from
all-trans—retinol: catalysis of all-trans—retinol oxidation by human P-450 cytochromes.

Drug Metab Dispos. 2000 Mar;28(3):315-22.

820. Roberts ES, Vaz AD, Coon MJ. Role of isozymes of rabbit microsomal cytochrome P-450 in
the metabolism of retinoic acid, retinol, and retinal. Mol Pharmacol. 1992 Feb;41(2):427-33.

821. Force RW, Nahata MC. Effect of histamine H2-receptor antagonists on vitamin B12
absorption. Ann Pharmacother. 1992 Oct;26(10):1283-6.

822. Mowat C, McCoII KE. Alterations in intragastric nitrite and vitamin C levels during acid
inhibitory therapy. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2001 Jun;15(3):523-37.

823. Russell RM, Golner BB, Krasinski SD, Sadowski JA, et al. Effect of antacid and H2
receptor antagonists on the intestinal absorption of folic acid. J Lab Clin Med. 1988 Oct;
112(4):458-63.

824. Perchonok M, Bourland C. NASA food systems: past, present, and future. Nutrition.

2002 Oct;18(10):913-20.

825. Barta DJ, Henninger DL. Regenerative life support systems - why do we need them?
Adv Space Res. 1994;14(11):40—3.

826. Lane HW, Zwart SR, Kloeris V, Smith SM. Chapter 25. Food and Nutrition for Space Flight.
In: Berdanier CD, Dwyer JT, Heber D, editors. Handbook of Nutrition and Food 3rd ed.
New York: CRC Press; 2013. p. 381-402.

"
"139","Authors and Editor

Scott M. Smith is Senior Nutritionist and Manager for Nutritional Biochemistry at the
NASA Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The primary goal of this group is to
determine the nutritional requirements for extended-duration space flight. This involves
conducting both operational and research activities, and has spanned Space Shuttle,
Mir, and International Space Station flight platforms, and planning for lunar exploration
missions. Research activities are conducted on space missions and in laboratories on
the ground; ground-based research projects include studies of the effects of simulated
weightlessness on calcium and bone metabolism, vitamin D supplementation in

crews wintering over in Antarctica, and oxidative damage in crews living 50 feet below
the surface of the ocean, and investigations of dietary and other countermeasures

for ameliorating space flight-induoed Changes in human physiology. Dr Smith also
participated in the definition of the current nutritional recommendations for extended-
duration space flight, and is Co-Chair of the Multilateral Medical Operations Panel’s
Nutrition Working Group for the International Space Station.

Sara R. Zwart is a Senior Scientist and Deputy Manager of the Nutritional Biochemistry
Laboratory at the NASA Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. She has been
involved with research investigating relationships between nutrition and side effects

of space flight, including bone loss, Changes in iron metabolism, and oxidative
damage. She has also worked with ground-based analogs of space flight, including
cell culture models, NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations (NEEMO) projects,
extravehicular activity analogs at the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory at the Johnson
Space Center, and bed rest models.

Martina Heer is Senior Nutritionist anol Adjunct Professor at the University of Bonn,
Institute of Food and Nutrition Sciences, Bonn, Germany, and Director of Nutrition
Sciences at PROFIL, Neuss, Germany. She also represents the European Space
Agency (ESA) in the Multilateral Medical Operations Panel’s Nutrition Working Group
for the International Space Station (ISS) and is a member of the ESA Nutrition Expert
Committee. Previously she headed the Space Physiology Division, Institute of Aerospace
Medicine, at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) for 6 years. Her main research interest
is to understand the interaction of nutrition and nutrients (in particular sodium and
sodium chloride) with other physiological systems such as the musculoskeletal and
cardiovascular systems. Her space flight studies started with Space Shuttle missions
and missions to the Mir station, and they continue with experiments on the ISS.

The space studies are combined with extensive research in the form of space analog
studies on the ground.

Jane M. Krauhs is a Senior Scientist with Wyle Science, Technology and Engineering
Group in Houston, Texas, and an Editor in the Life Sciences (Diplomate). She has edited
many technical and nonteohnical documents produced by the Nutritional Biochemistry
Laboratory and other space life science disciplines at the Johnson Space Center.

"
"140","Acknowledgments

This book represents a review of many areas of research as seen from the
perspective of a few space nutritionists, but many people have contributed to
this research and we would like to recognize as many as we can. At the heart
of all space life sciences research are the astronauts who bravely soared into
space. Beyond their required duty of flying and maintaining the spacecraft,

and all that that entails, they also volunteered to be operator and/or subject for
science experiments. Without their efforts and dedication to this process, none
of the research on space physiology and medicine would be possible, and we
are greatly in their debt.

In the field of space nutrition that we have reviewed, our laboratory teams have
played a central role. Although few original data are reported herein, the primary
publications represent the efforts of many individuals. We recognize the NASA
Nutritional Biochemistry Laboratory (NBL) team, a continually evolving group of
dedicated individuals who work tirelessly to ensure that all samples, from flight-
or ground-based studies, are collected, processed, and analyzed according

to detailed plans and procedures. Sample and data management represent a
somewhat tedious, but absolutely critical element of this research, and the NBL
team members handle this with unparalleled grace and tenacity.

Space flight research is literally unlike anything on Earth. The teams of review
and support staff, from the engineers who develop flight hardware to trainers
who work with the crews to accomplish all on-orbit data and sample collection,
to experiment support personnel who watch over every aspect of a study, all
ensure that nothing escapes completion. Again, these teams represent evolving
and ever—ohanging groups of names, but without their dedication, these studies
would simply not be possible.

Similarly, NASA management personnel across organizations and over

the years have supported efforts to allow these research projects to happen.
The NASA Human Research Program (HRP), established in 2006, set the stage
for conduct of most of the studies from which we obtained the International
Space Station data reported herein. “The HRP” includes the Human Health

and Countermeasures Element of the HRP, where the Nutrition Risk part of the
human space flight research plan resides. While many considered nutrition an
afterthought on the list of potential countermeasures, or worse, thought nutrition
to be simply what the food system provided, others championed nutrition
research and have nourished it for the past 8 years.

We are indebted to many of the scientists at NASA who took time to review
sections of the text. Specifically, Brian Crucian for the Immune Function,
Inflammation, and Nutrition section, Robert Pietrzyk for the Renal Stone Risk
subsection, Lori Ploutz-Snyder for the Energy and Fuel Metabolism section

and the Muscle and Protein sections, and Jean Sibonga for the Bone section.
Their input was extremely helpful and valuable, and the authors take blame

for any mistakes or oversights remaining.

"
"141","We are grateful to Cynthia Bush, Senior Graphic Design Specialist/Illustrator

at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. The products of her efforts to create
the cover and several of the specialized figures herein are outstanding. She was
subsequently also responsible for the content layout work. If what you hold in
your hands (or see on a screen) looks good—it is thanks to Cindy.

As evidenced by the affiliations of Dr Martina Heer, the collaboration between
US and German investigators over the past 10 to 15 years has promoted growth
and expansion of knowledge, as any good collaboration does. European Space
Agency and German Aerospace Center (DLR) support of nutrition research has
contributed greatly to this field of science as reviewed herein. Similar to those
described above for NASA, a management structure and dedicated laboratory
support team have enabled outstanding research.

We are indebted to many for the opportunities we have had to conduct research,
to publish research, and to review research herein. We hope you find this volume
useful for your own knowledge base.

SMS, SRZ, MH.

"
"142","7: LD A
m m H U:
op mmg o oogoo N
oh H N N m mlxm °°
a H :1! .H 4-! +l +l +I +I +l +I N‘
v vqgg <r o mmo 7,,”
m <r°°H l\ N NmN t‘
m N o oomm,o
_ F'I MMNCQ
om
:L
rug
C-O H m n§.g
C mm:—
gm gnu“, 3 320me
“E CD-HHm-H N m ”mm?“
gm Hh-H-H +l 'H +I+'+'O E
.C NH!“
EDA QMNgm
0C9, 13
Q0) 2%
09E“ 5°-
L g '3' O} O
ggg mﬂNN '\ Ln Nﬁmgm
—"" m+l +I+| N qu-O.-o
(15.00) Hm-H +l ‘H +I"""""""":: E
_c\ [\OH H HHHg-U
LC> m H "" OMON‘”
|_|__C-D V NO'C
.g-g 1‘33“
€09 m “3
Em- oqoq . co m mm ”“3
213% 30001 [x nggmqmmmm$80
UDQ N-HHHN «o mHvNlemNoomgoQa;
10:) U5 .0.- m o .H H 4-: +l 4-: +l +1 _H 4-: +I +I +I +I +I 4-: ﬂ 3
0-7): quo‘. o_ YonggQQVng—m
835 3,3003 3 geggmcqggaaﬂe'é
Lg“ l\ M &D H MNNgm
coma) ‘3“
89% 58
c N'H - H .goN"" Whm—.GJ
«5:09 <r.oo . m . . moo no (A
5,93 V°°""'N m mﬂwgmm gmuNaeg
0 4‘7.) E +I +I +I +I +I +I _H +I 4.. +I +l +I +I +I 2,; 53
5091?: [\qux. «3 LnNoo oo mqmcg
3> mmH ' ' 'q‘oﬁ 0
(Dow oomﬁﬂ ﬂ Smmmhm gag?”
8>~<D N F, q. ooNOOH monN£$
0.03 5.2,
(DC m3“,
_a>w m 5
co .19 “Lolx ""' “5'53
$9: 30606""! 01' H‘tmNﬂ omoomm'é
'05 ""' +I +I N N ”nﬁo
5 o u— a 'H +I +I 4"" +| 'H +| 'H “H +' +I u =
Ll- < w.. IQ. IVN Naga-
3 CD cm“) 00 00 con mm<r2Q<
m0)? ﬂan” 8 ”“8“"": 3302501)
335$ ng-E
meL Ed:
named.) “WU
NEH? '0 o. 0
=-— g \0 .0'0 x+|x
H9 o”°\ — ER '° “’5'“
Egg“ “c:cm‘m‘ 813“;J 'UEE FD “58E
~t=c >gxx 8 3¥\\o \. £5 ""E“
1-!ng to mm to m“-°°° “DU"" no 2 ‘”
=3>C 004-!“ bth°~~ EDE-o-o “150”“
—:m xo\.EC “Enema, »:\\EE .-»‘°
acme ggc: 2 z§ﬁﬁ é°ﬁww~=uﬁmg
h -—L mmo xgmgm ""—0 mcu""-‘°H“‘°
“-0450 CCLE m“ 0““‘5—00 c'UHro-D—m
=Q_3q_ mmaag' cmcmmomc 0._oo 12—""
23:5 0U._U._u.mxua§:Nmo.3<..<_nc

"
"143","List of Figures

Figure 1. 2
Mike Lopez-Alegria collects the first blood sample on the International Space Station
on October 5, 2006, having inserted the needle himself. The collection tubes can be
seen (one in hand, the others in elastic bands on his belt assembly), along with a sharps
container and detailed procedures (both Velcroed to the wall). He had set the camera to
automatically take pictures periodically, snapping this one in the process.
Figure 2. 3
The refrigerated centrifuge on ISS.

Figure 3. 3
Left: Urine Collection Device (UCD), shown here with a syringe on the collection port,
and a female adapter. Right: A UCD with a male adapter shown floating on ISS.

Figure 4. 3
Sunita Williams shown here with a UCD, contained in a ziplock bag to provide another
layer of containment.

Figure 5. 4
Urine Containment Bag, used for holding discarded UCDs until they can be disposed
of along with other trash from ISS.

Figure 6. 4
External view of a MELFI, showing the covers for the 4 dewars.

Figure 7. 4
External view of a MELFI, showing the interior of one of the dewars, with 1 tray partially
removed. The 2 urine syringes to be placed in the freezer can be seen Velcroed to

the wall.

Figure 8. 4
Closer view of the MELFI tray, with compartment open for sample insertion. The mesh
bags are designed to contain the samples from a given blood collection session. Blood
samples are shown in this image.

Figure 9. 4
Crewmember Greg Chamitoff (left) can be seen with the MELFI tray under his right hand,
performing sample transfers from the MELFI into the Double Cold Bag (Sandy Magnus
has her hand inside the DOB in this image).

Figure10. 5
Peggy Whitson with the opening screen of the Food Frequency Questionnaire. After

a crewmember enters name or initials, the second screen opens with a list of food
categories, under each of which is a list of food items grouped together according

to nutrient content.

Figure 11. 6
A screen shot from the Food Frequency Questionnaire. Available foods are grouped
according to key nutrient content. Shown here are 2 groups: “Fruit” and “Beans, Soups.”
The foods provided by the European Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the
Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency, and NASA are shown in black font, and foods
provided by Russia are shown in blue.

Figure 12. 6
Karen Nyberg (left), Expedition 36 Flight Engineer, using the Space Linear Acceleration
Mass Measurement Device (SLAMMD). Tom Marshburn (right), Expedition 34 Flight
Engineer, using the Body Mass Measurement Device (BMMD). Photo credits: NASA.

"
"144","Figure 13. 8
|n-flight dietary intake of crewmembers in different space programs. Data are expressed
as percentage of energy requirements predicted by the World Health Organization (17)
and are mean i SD. Apollo N = 33, Skylab N = 9, Shuttle N = 32, Mir N = 7, ISS E1-18
N = 26, E19-36 N =31. E = expedition. Apollo and Skylab data are from Bourland et al
(32). Figure is adapted from earlier publications (2, 33), with additional published data
included (6, 31, 34).

Figure 14. 10
|n-flight body mass measurement data from 55 ISS crewmembers. Pre = preflight, FDx
2 flight day x, R+x = x days after landing. Data are expressed as percent Change from
preflight values and are mean i SD. Figure and data adapted from Zwart et al (7).

Figure 15. 10
Changes in body weight on the day of landing relative to before flight. Data are
expressed as percent Change from preflight values. Each symbol represents

1 crewmember from a mission on the Space Shuttle (green, N=25), Skylab (red, N=9),
Mir (blue squares, N219), ISS Expeditions 1-18 (dark purple, N=26), or Expeditions
19-36 (light purple, N=31). Duration data have been adjusted slightly to ensure
anonymity. Data updated from initial publications (2, 56).

Figure 16. 11
Relationship between energy intake (kcaI/kg body mass/d) and weight loss (Change

in body mass/d, kg) during Apollo missions. N = 33. Data are courtesy of William
Carpentier.

Figure 17. 15
Relationship between fish intake during Iong-duration flight and WhoIe-body bone
mineral density loss after flight on ISS. Figure adapted from (116).

Figure 18. 17
Protein intake during space flight on ISS missions (N=56). Each point represents

an individual crewmember, and is their reported average intake over the course of

the mission. Dashed lines represent space flight (and ground-based) protein intake
requirements of 0.8 g protein/kg body mass, and the range of protein intakes

(1 .2.-1 .7 g/kg) recommended by the American Dietetic Association, Dietitians

of Canada, and American College of Sports Medicine for high-intensity athletes (130).
Figure 19. 22
Total serum testosterone concentrations (mean i SD) before (L-x), during (FDx), and
after flight on ISS. Although Circulating concentrations decreased significantly after
flight (at R+0), no other time point differed significantly from the preflight mean. N=15.
Data are from Smith et al (237).

Figure 20. 23
Total serum testosterone concentrations (mean i SD) in subjects before, during, and
after bed rest with (dashed line and open Circles) or without (solid line and filled squares)
an artificial gravity countermeasure. These data have been published (134), although the
pre-bed rest data (BR-Q, BR-1) were combined as an average in the original manuscript.
In this figure, the 2 pre-bed rest data points are graphed separately, as reported in (237).
Figure 21. 28
Urine pH (mean i SD) of amino acid-supplemented (red) and placebo (blue) groups
during 4 weeks of bed rest. *Significantly different from before bed rest (Pre), P < 0.05.
#Significant difference between groups, P < 0.05. Figure is from Zwart et al, J Appl
Physiol 2005 (278).

"
"145","Figure 22. 32
Bone resorption (as indicated by urinary n-telopeptide, left panel) and bone formation
(as evaluated by serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, right panel) during 17 weeks
of bed rest with (solid line) or without (dashed line) heavy resistance exercise. Data are
expressed as percentage of pre-bed rest values, and are mean i SD. The vertical line
separates the bed rest and post bed rest periods. Data adapted from (192).

Figure 23. 32
Bone resorption (as indicated by urinary n-telopeptide, left panel) and bone formation
(as indicated by serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, right panel) during 60 days
of bed rest with (solid line) or without (dashed line) a combination of resistance exercise
and supine treadmiII/LBNP exercise. Data are expressed as percentage of pre-bed rest
values, and are mean i SD. Data adapted from (317).

Figure 24. 33
Garrett Reisman shown using the interim Resistance Exercise Device (iRED, left), whi|e
Sandy Magnus is shown using the Advanced Resistance Exercise Device (ARED, right)
on ISS. The iRED was launched in 2000 with the first ISS crew, and the ARED replaced
it in late 2008.

Figure 25. 33
Body composition Changes (left panel, lean body mass; right panel, total body fat) in
astronauts on Mir and ISS missions. ISS crews had access to either iRED or ARED
exercise devices. Data are expressed as percent Change per month of flight and are
mean i SD. Figure adapted from (31).

Figure 26. 33
Bone mineral density loss in astronauts on Mir and ISS missions. ISS crews had access
to either iRED or ARED exercise devices. Data are expressed as percent Change per
month of flight. Figure adapted from (31).

Figure 27. 34
Bone mineral density (BMD) loss after flight in men (N=33, open bars) and women

(n29, solid bars) who used either the iRED or ARED exercise device. Data are expressed
as percent Change per month of flight and are mean i SD. Figure adapted from (50).
Figure 28. 36
Relationship between omega—3 fatty acid consumption and bone resorption during

bed rest (left panel), and relationship between fish consumption and percent change in
whoIe-body bone mineral density at landing in astronauts (right panel). Figures adapted
from (116).

Figure 29. 39
Pre- and postflight data (mean i SD) from testing required for medical operations

show that vitamin D status decreased after Iong-duration space flight, despite vitamin

D supplementation with 400 IU/d (black dashed line, N216). In-flight data (purple line)
show that 800 IU/d is enough vitamin D3 to maintain status during Iong-duration space
flight (N226). Red lines depict Institute of Medicine-defined lower acceptable limits
(with respect to bone health), and upper advised limit (390). The green line at 80 nmol/L
reflects what many perceive as an optimal level with respect to parathyroid hormone
suppression and non-bone health outcomes. Figure adapted, and data updated, from
Smith et al (409).

"
"146","Figure 30. 40
Serum phylloquinone before launch (launch minus 180 d, or L-180, L-45, and L-10),
during flight (flight days 15, 30, 60, 120, and 180), on landing day (R+0), and 30 days
post landing (R+30). The dashed lines indicate the normal range for phylloquinone.
Data are mean :SD, N=26. Data and N are expanded from the original publication

of these findings (419).

Figure 31. 41
Dietary phosphorus:calcium ratio in ISS crewmembers during flight (approximate

flight days 15, 30, 60, 120, and 180). The dashed line indicates a ratio of 1.5.

Data are mean :SD, N=9.

Figure 32. 47
The percent change from preflight (mean i SD) in serum ferritin (red circles, solid line)
and urinary 80HdG (blue squares, dashed line) before, during, and after Iong-duration
space flight (N223). “Pre” was determined from the mean of preflight data points (3 for
ferritin, 4 for 80HdG), and percent change was calculated from that average. (469)
Figure 33. 51
Relationship between energy intake (kcaI/kg body mass/d) and plasma volume loss
(mL/d) during Apollo missions. N=21. Data are courtesy of William Carpentier.

Figure 34. 52
Postflight heart rate under 3 conditions, predicted (from factors including plasma volume
loss) versus actual measured heart rate.

Figure 35. 52
Postflight heart rate, predicted (from factors including energy intake) versus actual
measured heart rate.

Figure 36. 53
Energy intake during space flight on ISS missions (N=56). Each point represents an
individual crewmember, and is their reported average daily energy intake over the course
of the mission. The dashed line represents 33 kcaI/kg body mass, the energy intake
needed to avoid plasma volume loss. Solid lines represent the mean i 1SD.

Figure 37. 58
Proposed mechanism of the effects of high dietary sodium on bone loss.

Figure 38. 61
Estimated supersaturation risk from the Renal Stone Risk Profile during space flight on
ISS. Each symbol represents a 24-h urine pool, and the solid black line represents the
group mean. The red dashed line is the point above which the risk is greater than in

the non-stone forming population.

Figure 39. 62
Relationship between urinary citrate and sodium urate supersaturation. The dashed

line at 2 represents the average risk of sodium urate stone formation for the general
population, with numbers above 2 being higher—than-average risk. Citrate, which
typically protects against renal stone risk, is actually positively correlated with sodium
urate supersaturation (Pearson r = 0.065; P < 0.016). The red dashed line is the point
above which the risk is greater than in the non-stone-forming population. Data are from
1399 twenty-four—hour urine collections.

"
"147","Figure 40.64
Overview of ‘l-carbon metabolism. AA, amino acids; CBS, cystathionine B-synthase;
CYS, cystathionine; FA, fatty acids; HCY, homocysteine; aKBT, a-ketobutyrate; MCA,
methylcitric acid; MM-COA, methylmalonyl coenzyme A (CoA); MMA, methylmalonic
acid; MS, methionine synthase; 5-MTHF, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate; 5,10-MTHF,
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate; MTHFR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; MTRR,
5-methyltetrahydrofolate homocysteine methyltransferase reductase; PRP-COA,
propionyl CoA; SAH, S-adenosylhomocysteine; SAM,S-adenosylmethionine;

SUC-CoA, succinyl CoA; THF, tetrahydrofolate

Figure 41.65
Artistic depiction of vision issues related to space flight, and the potential involvement
of genetic influences in this problem. The depiction of a different DNA base pair (blue
above and red below) in the 2 strands reflects genetic polymorphisms, or multiple forms,
of the DNA. Inset imagery includes ISS and a Hubble Space Telescope image of the
Cat’s Eye Nebula, to reflect that these issues are relevant for not only ISS missions,

but exploration-Class missions as well.

Figure 42. 66
R80 (left) and serum folate (right) before, during, and after long-duration space flight
(data are mean i SD). Note: RBC folate data are not available during flight because

of sample processing requirements.

Figure 43. 68
Serum retinol (left) and B-carotene (right) before, during, and after long-duration space
flight. Dashed lines represent normal range. Data are mean i SD.

Figure 44. 73
An interaction between serum cortisol, vitamin D status, and the probability of EBV
shedding. Data from all 41 participants in the Antarctic study are included in the graph,
and the data were statistically analyzed using the continuous data set of cortisol data.
The data are split into the 2 subgroups here for presentation purposes. The graph is
from Zwart et al (407).

Figure 45. 80
Serum o-tocopherol (top left) and y-tocopherol (top right), and total vitamin E:lipid ratio
(left) before, during, and after long-duration space flight. All data are mean i SD.

"
"148","Abbreviations

80HdG 8—hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine
ADP adenosine diphosphate

AMP adenosine monophosphate

ARED Advanced Resistance Exercise Device
BR bed rest (day)

BSAP bone—specific alkaline phosphatase
cal calorie

CoA coenzyme A

002 carbon dioxide

d day, deci

DLR German Aerospace Center

DNA deoxyribonucleic acid

DRI dietary reference intake

DXA duaI-energy x-ray absorptiometry
EBV Epstein-Barr virus

EE energy expenditure

Eq equivalent

ESA European Space Agency

EVA extravehicular activity (space walk)
FDx flight day x

FFQ Food Frequency Questionnaire

9 gram

g acceleration due to gravity (1g 2 Earth gravity)
GLA gamma-carboxyglutamic acid

Gy Gray

h, hr hour

HRP Human Research Program

Hz henz

IOM Institute of Medicine

iRED interim resistance exercise device
ISS International Space Station

IU international unit

J joule

k kilo

KCit potassium Citrate

KMgCit potassium magnesium Citrate

L-x x days before launch

L liter

LBNP lower-body negative pressure

p micro

m meter, miIIi

M mega

MDA malondialdehyde

MELFI minus—eighty (degrees) laboratory freezer for ISS
mol mole

"
"149","MRI magnetic resonance imaging

n nano

n number of subjects in a subsample

N number of subjects in a sample of a population
NAD nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NADH reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADP nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NADPH reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NBL Nutritional Biochemistry Laboratory

NEEMO NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations
NF-KB NF-kappa B

NK natural killer

NTX n-telopeptide

P probability, phosphate

PGF2a 8—iso—prostaglandin F2a

PL pyridoxal

PLP pyridoxal 5'-phosphate

PM pyridoxamine

PMP pyridoxamine 5'-phosphate

PN pyridoxine

PNP pyridoxine 5'-phosphate

Post after bed rest

Pre before flight or bed rest

psia pound(s) per square inch absolute

PTH parathyroid hormone

PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acid

r bivariate correlation coefficient

R+x x days after landing (recovery) or end of bed rest
RBC red blood cell

RDA recommended dietary allowance

RNA ribonucleic acid

ROS reactive oxygen species

SD standard deviation

TEE total energy expenditure

THF tetrahydrofolate

U unit

UCB urine containment bag

UCD urine collection device

ULLS unilateral limb suspension

UPA Urine Processor Assembly

US United States

UV ultraviolet

VDR vitamin D receptor

WHO World Health Organization

y year

"
"150",""
"151",". .
r‘: i +
__ “Hf .
.. l _ . H .
- i' J r—h _ .
4! |_5"" ' —
r“I Iii r“ ‘
-.'. — - I _ .. --
_ .- . L ' - I-fl'E—_ —
_ . a a 1’ ,—.
I ..-, F'- I ""'J I'-
. .- ' I-
-- - - :_ H
J 2 . ._.J H;— '
. r .
R 21‘ “
. _J _ .r‘ .
IﬂiumllTIu-umeK-HMIIIH .. .
mnmmm ""' '
2101mm fa- _ I
m.tum n
” I . '.
WH-tE-ﬂtlﬁlﬂ .. + +

"
