"","x"
"1","Author’ s Acce ted Manuscri t mm:
p p 4 m #42? /1
115% msummmmm
Ophthalmic Changes and Increased Intracranial
Pressure Associated with Long Duration Space-
ﬂight: An Emerging Understanding
Karina Marshall-Bowman, Michael R.
Barrattm , C. Robert Gibson
ammo."" *ﬁ,
*2. <2
°.’ SaenceDIrect
mswmwuwwm ﬁ 1:?
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
PII: 80094-5765(13)00026-X
DOI: http://dX.d0i.0rg/10.1016/j.actaastr0.2013.01.014
Reference: AA4655
To appear in: Add Astronautica
Received date: 23 May 2012
Revised date: 8 J anuary 2013
Accepted date: 12 J anuary 2013
Cite this article as: Karina Marshall-Bowman, Michael R. Barrattm and C.
Robert Gibson, Ophthalmic Changes and Increased Intracranial Pressure Associated with
Long Duration Spaceﬂight: An Emerging Understanding, Acta Astronautica, http://dX.d0
i.0rg/10.1016/j.actaastr0.2013.01.014
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a
service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The
manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting galley proof
before it is published in its ﬁnal citable form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply
to the journal pertain.

"
"2","Ophthalmic Changes and Increased Intracranial Pressure Associated With Long Duration
Spaceﬂight: An Emerging Understanding
Karina Marshall—Bowman 2"" b
Karina.Marshall-Bowman@dlr.de
Michael R. Barratt 2"" *
Michael.r.barratt@nasa.g0V
C. Robert Gibson c
Charles. gibson-1@nasa. g0V

aNASA J 0hns0n Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX, 77058 USA
b Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Linder Héhe 1, Cologne,
51 147, Germany
C Wyle Science, Technology & Engineering, Houston, TX
>“Corresponding author:
Michael Barratt
Astronaut Ofﬁce
NASA J 0hns0n Space Center/ CB
2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX7705 8
Phone: 1 281 244-8209
E-mail: Michael.r.barratt@nasa.gov
Abstract
For many years, there have been anecdotal reports of Vision Changes by astronauts following
short and long-duration spaceﬂight. Much of this was attributed to hyperopic shifts related to the
age of the ﬂying population. However, it has recently been recognized that Vision Changes are
actually quite common in astronauts and are associated With a constellation of ﬁndings including
elevated intracranial pressure, optic disc edema, globe ﬂattening, optic nerve sheath thickening,
hyperopic shifts and retinal Changes. With advanced imaging modalities available on the ground
along With the ﬁdelity of in-ﬂight diagnostic capabilities previously unavailable, information on
this newly recognized syndrome is accumulating. As of this writing eleven cases of Visual
impairment experienced by astronauts during missions 0n-b0ard the International Space Station

"
"3","(188) have been documented and studied. Although the exact mechanisms of the Vision Changes
are unknown, it is hypothesized that increased intracranial pressure (ICP) is a contributing factor.
Microgravity is the dominant cause of many physiological Changes during spaceﬂight and is
thought to contribute signiﬁcantly to the observed ophthalmic Changes. However, several
secondary factors that could contribute to increased ICP and Vision changes in spaceﬂight have
been proposed. Possible contributors include microgravity-induced cephalad ﬂuid shift, venous
obstruction due to microgravity-induced anatomical shifts, high levels of spacecraft cabin carbon
dioxide, heavy resistive exercise, and high sodium diet. Individual susceptibility to Visual
impairment is not fully understood, though a demographic of affected astronauts is emerging.
This paper describes the current understanding of this newly recognized syndrome, presents data
from eleven individual cases, and discusses details of potential contributing factors. The
occurrence of Visual Changes in long duration missions in microgravity is one of the most
significant Clinical issues to date for the human spaceﬂight community, and a comprehensive
understanding of the issue at Whole is critical to ensure safe space exploration in the future.
Keywords: Vision Changes, microgravity, long duration spaceﬂight, intracranial pressure, optic
disc edema, Visual acuity, retinal imaging, optical coherence tomography

1.0 Introduction

During the past 50 years of human spaceﬂight, a broad but incomplete understanding of the
physiological and anatomical Changes that accompany adaptation to weightlessness has been
developed. The most pervasive ﬁndings, including headward ﬂuid shifts, reduction in blood
volume and altered ﬂuid regulation, muscle atrophy, and bone loss are fairly well Characterized.
However, as human ﬂight time accrues and new investigative methods become available, the
knowledge of human acclimation to microgravity continues to expand and previously
unrecognized phenomena are being discovered. In this paper we discuss a significant and
recently characterized human response to microgravity.

For decades there have been sporadic anecdotal reports of Vision Changes by both short (up to
two weeks) and long-duration astronauts. Given the ﬂying population and their age range,
typically in their fourth to sixth decades, much of this has been attributed to presbyopia
exacerbated by hyperopic (farsighted) shifts. However, it has recently been recognized by the
space medical community that Visual acuity changes secondary to hyperopic shifts are actually
common in astronauts and are associated With a consistent set of diagnostic findings. These
include ﬂattening of the globe 0f the eye, retinal Changes, and in some individuals, elevated
intracranial pressure (ICP). With the exception of Visual acuity shifts, these findings have
generally remained below the symptomatic threshold, such that deliberate diagnostic testing is
required to identify the entire syndrome.

"
"4","This Spaceﬂight ocular syndrome (SOS), preliminarily named by the authors pending further
elucidation of a causative mechanism, appears to be fairly common in the long-duration ﬂight
population [1-3]. As of this writing, eleven individuals participating in long-duration ﬂights on-
board the International Space Station (188), typically on the order of siX months, have presented
with Visual Changes and subclinical ﬁndings. With advanced pre- and postﬂight imaging
modalities now available, along with the recent introduction of new in-ﬂight diagnostic
capabilities, information on this newly recognized spaceﬂight ocular syndrome is rapidly
accumulating. Although the exact causative mechanisms of these Vision Changes are unknown, it
is hypothesized that increased ICP associated with headward ﬂuid shifts is a primary factor,
along with localized intraorbital effects that lead to findings out of proportion to the modest ICP
elevations seen. In addition, several secondary factors of the spaceﬂight environment may also
contribute. These include the high levels of carbon dioxide in spacecraft cabins, heavy resistive
exercise, anthropomorphic Changes due to microgravity, and high sodium diet. Additionally, an
enzymatic polymorphism in the l-Carbon metabolism cycle has recently been identified as a
factor associated with the observed Vision Changes, but is not Clear if this is causative or
contributory [4]. Individual susceptibility to ophthalmic Changes and Visual impairment is
currently unknown, though a deﬁning demographic of affected astronauts is emerging. The
observed pathophysiological phenomena are complex and it is likely that the etiology is
multifactorial. This paper describes what is currently known about this spaceﬂight ocular
syndrome, its implications and risk, and directions for future study.

2.0 Subjects, Materials and Methods

2.1 Recognition of the Syndrome

2.1.1 Historical Review

Until recently, there has been little formal documentation of Vision Changes in astronauts, despite
occasional anecdotal reports of Visual disturbances since the beginning of human spaceﬂight.
Between 1977 and 1991, 23% of applicants to NASA’s astronaut program were medically
disqualified, with 9.4% due to inadequate Vision [5]. Once selected, astronauts were subj ect to
ophthalmic examination, including Visual acuity and fundoscopy, before and after ﬂight.

Some Mercury astronauts claimed that they were able to see obj ects such as ships and airplanes
with the naked eye, suggesting that Visual acuity is actually improved during spaceﬂight. These
reports prompted Duntley et al. [6] to test Visual performance in Gemini astronauts before,
during, and after 8-14 day missions. Data from in-ﬂight Vision testing showed that Visual acuity
was neither improved nor degraded during or after spaceﬂight [6]. Hawkins and Ziegelschmid
[7] found that the only Changes between pre and post-ﬂight Visual testing of Apollo astronauts
were in the superior, superior-nasal and superior-temporal Visual ﬁelds, which were constricted
post-ﬂight. No Changes in Visual acuity were found [7]. Interestingly, retinal vascular
photography revealed a decrease in vessel size at 3.5 hours post-ﬂight. During the Space Shuttle

"
"5","program, with the exception of contrast sensitiVity, in-ﬂight studies revealed minimal Changes to
Vision [8].

Subj ective crew reports of Vision Changes have been more a hallmark of long-duration
spaceﬂight. Although these were not experienced by astronauts in the US Skylab program, this
may be attributed to a low number 0ft0ta1 participants (9 crewmembers) and fairly short ﬂights
(28, 59, 84 days) as compared with the Russian Mir or 188 programs. Missions to these
platforms are typically on the order of 6 months, corresponding in part to the 0n-0rbit service life
of the Soyuz spacecraft. US crewmembers in these programs experienced a degradation in near
Visual acuity that occurred with enough regularity to ﬂy ‘anticipatory’ corrective lenses. It was
recently revealed in a study by Myasnikov and Stepanova that 8 0f 16 cosmonauts deliberately
studied displayed optic disc edema after long-duration ﬂights aboard the Mir Space Station [3],
suggesting that SOS is not a new development.

2.1.2 Survey Information

As subj ective reports of Vision changes accumulated, a re-examination of the standard post-ﬂight
medical survey was undertaken. Results were analyzed for approximately 300 NASA astronauts
over more than 500 ﬂight experiences, revealing that Vision changes associated with both short
and long-duration spaceﬂight are common. Approximately 23% 0f short—duration Shuttle
astronaut ﬂight experiences were associated with subjective degradation in near Vision, with 11%
showing documented post-ﬂight refraction Changes. In the long-duration population, nearly 50%
0f astronaut ﬂight experiences on 188 missions showed near Vision degradation, with 34%
showing documented refraction Changes post-ﬂight. These signiﬁcant ﬁndings are reported in
the landmark article by Mader, et a1. [1] that ﬁrst describes this ocular syndrome.

2.1.3 Diagnostic Modalities

As evidence of Visual impairment associated with spaceﬂight accumulated, NASA began to take
a more aggressive approach to the issue. Standard pre- and post-ﬂight eye examinations have
consisted of Visual acuity assessment, refraction, intraocular pressure (IOP) measurements, and
direct fundoscopic retinal Visualization during dilated examination. Newly available imaging
modalities were recruited to study specific anatomic areas of interest. Ophthalmic examinations
before and after ﬂight were expanded in 2009 to include 3 Tesla orbital magnetic resonance
imaging (3T MRI), showing the eye, optic nerve/sheath and other surrounding structures in great
detail. In addition, optical coherence tomography (OCT), which provides high resolution trans-
pupil imagery of the retinal layers and optic disc, was added. Pre and postﬂight OCT studies are
highly sensitive to many of the anatomical Changes associated with this syndrome, such as
minute nerve ﬁber layer thickening.

Inﬂight diagnostic and monitoring capabilities were also added. During a recent ISS ﬂight, two
long-duration physician crewmembers noted degradation of near Visual acuity several weeks into

"
"6","ﬂight, requiring stronger corrective lenses for reading and Close in-cabin work. Both
crewmembers remained fully correctable and were otherwise without symptoms. One of these
crewmembers also reported a right-sided transparent but noticeable Visual defect, roughly in the
shape of a vertical crescent. Ground biomedical support teams and other personnel were able to
obtain and rapidly ﬂight-certify a laptop based retinal imagery camera and software package
(PI‘OV1Z10IITM). With real time guidance from ground specialists, the first ultrasound images
showing these eye Changes in microgravity were obtained. Both direct retinal imagery and eye
ultrasound are now standard inﬂight monitoring procedures.

The observation of optic disc edema on retinal imagery clinically suggests elevated ICP, and the
overall syndrome likely includes this condition. However currently, ICP can only be ascertained
Via direct measurement and therefore has not been assessed inﬂight. The opening cerebrospinal
ﬂuid pressure (a measurement of ICP) was obtained in 4 individuals of this initial series during a
postﬂight spinal tap, although this is not a routine procedure.

3.0 Results: Description of Cases

As of July, 2012, eleven cases of spaceﬂight ocular syndrome have been documented in 188
crewmembers (ﬁndings summarized in Table 1). This number is expected to change as more
speciﬁc criteria for diagnosis are developed and crewmembers that ﬂew missions before the
recognition of this syndrome are examined more Closely. All cases have occurred in male
astronauts while ﬂying 6-month missions on-board the 188. Visual acuity shift was reported in a
time window of three weeks to three months into the mission. It is noted that Visual acuity shifts
tend to plateau and not progress beyond 3-4 months.

The anatomical findings in these cases are not universally associated with Vision Changes. Case
3 (ﬁgure 2), however, is notable; this individual demonstrated the greatest degree of optic disc
edema, but had no reported or measured Visual Change. All others demonstrated a degradation of
near Visual acuity in one or both eyes. Case 6 did not notice Changes in Visual acuity during
ﬂight, but these were demonstrated postﬂight. IOP was also measured pre and post-ﬂight, and
was found to decrease slightly in 4/ 11 cases. It is interesting to note that maj ority of the findings
occurred to a greater degree, and many times solely in the right eye (OD).

OCT was used to assess the presence of Choroidal folds, retinal nerve ﬁber layer (RNFL)
thickness, and optic disc edema. Retinal nerve ﬁber layer thickening was observed in 8/11 cases,
ranging from mild to severe. Dilated fundoscopic examinations post-ﬂight also revealed the
presence of Choroidal folds, optic disc edema, and cotton wool spots (Figure 1 and 2), consistent
with OCT findings. Choroidal folds, parallel striae in the posterior pole of the choroid that may
be associated with increased ICP [9], were found in 7/11 astronauts post—ﬂight. Optic disc
edema was observed in 7/11 cases, ranging from grade 1 to grade 3, again primarily in the right
eye (Figure 2). Cotton wool spots, areas of localized damage to retinal nerve ﬁbers caused by
retinal swelling and resulting stasis of axonal transport, were found in 4/11 cases.

Postﬂight magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies were performed on 9 of the 11 astronauts.
Globe ﬂattening (Figure 3 and 4) was observed in all but one of these, and optic nerve sheath
(ONS) distension was seen in all cases (Figure 4).

"
"7","Although inﬂight images are not reproduced here, retinal images obtained by crewmembers have
been of sufﬁcient quality to demonstrate optic disc edema. In addition, eye ultrasound,
performed under real-time guidance by ground specialists, has produced high quality images that
demonstrate globe ﬂattening and optic nerve sheath distension. This has corroborated ground
studies and established these modalities as Viable in-ﬂight diagnostic capabilities.
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) opening pressure, a measure of intracranial pressure, was assessed
postﬂight Via lumbar puncture in four astronauts presenting with optic disc edema. Clinically,
idiopathic intracranial hypertension is diagnosed with an opening pressure greater than 25.0 cm
H20. However, most cases in the Clinical population presenting with symptomatic intracranial
hypertension have an ICP well above this opening pressure [10]. All astronauts that were tested
showed apparent elevations of CSF pressure, up to 28.5 cmHzO even after 57 days post-ﬂight.
Arguably these are within Clinical normal values in two and mildly elevated on the other two, but
certainly higher than would be expected for an otherwise normal population. Unfortunately, no
preﬂight baselines were obtained in any crewmembers for deﬁnitive comparison.
Determining the incidence of spaceﬂight ocular syndrome is dependent on when in time the
ﬁndings were ﬁrst thoroughly documented and the extent of investigation of subsequent
crewmembers. Using 27 as a denominator (determined by using Case 1 and all subsequent US
Segment crewmembers through July of 2012), yields an overall incidence of 40% (50% for male
crewmembers). Although diagnostic criteria differ, this is consistent with the observation by
Myasnikov [3] and with the near Vision compromise in long duration crewmembers reported by
Mader [1]. As new tools are applied to detect more subtle ﬁndings of eye and related CNS
anatomy, and as the diagnostic criteria are settled over next few years, more exact incidence rates
will be determined. It is too early to tell whether these shifts are permanent. Crewmembers
have experienced varying degrees of return of near Visual acuity to preﬂight levels. On the other
hand, these Changes may persist for years post-ﬂight, suggesting that acuity shifts and other
anatomic perturbations may be permanent.
4.0 Discussion

4.1 History vs. Present
Even though the maj ority of Vision Changes have been noted in astronauts within the past few
years, it is almost certain that Changes to ophthalmic anatomy and physiology have been
occurring since the beginning of human spaceﬂight. The recent recognition of this phenomenon
is largely based on new assessment tools that have allowed for more complete characterization of
this syndrome and revealed anatomical ﬁndings previously unknown and undocumented. More
accurate and reliable cycloplegic refraction exams were only started in recent years. Also,
implementation of pre- and post—ﬂight 3T MRI of the eye and OCT has enabled documentation
of small anatomical Changes, providing contributing pieces of the larger syndrome. Notably,
Kramer, et al. describes the spectrum of intraorbital and intracranial ﬁndings from 3T MRI of 27
astronauts whom had been exposed to microgravity [2].

"
"8","It is also interesting to note that the demographic of the astronaut population has Changed over
time. Prior to 2000, when ﬂights to the ISS began, the mean astronaut age was 38, Whereas as of
2011 it was 46.7, possibly contributing to an increased susceptibility to Visual impairment due to
expected age-related hyperopic shifts and presbyopia. It can also be noted that Visual
impairment occurs more frequently and to a greater degree in long-duration missions (6+
months) compared to short missions (up to 2 weeks).

4.2 Anatomical Review

A brief discussion of CSF circulation and eye anatomy follows.

4.2.1 The Intracranial Space

The brain is enclosed by three membranous layers; the outer dum, Which conforms to the inner
surface of the cranium; the arachnoid, Which does not follow the surface of the brain but
comprises a loosely ﬁtting sac; and the pia, Which is Closely conformal t0 the brain surface,
following its convolutions and contours. CSF ﬂows between the arachnoid and pia, contained in
the subarachnoid space. The classical understanding is that CSF is produced in the choroid
plexus, vascular structures that line the ventricles 0f the brain and allow plasma to filter
selectively from capillary blood into the CSF circulation, as well as around blood vessels in
direct contact With the subarachnoid space (SAS). From this system, CSF is absorbed back into
blood circulation Via several routes. The primary route is thought to be Via arachnoid
granulations, small protrusions 0f the arachnoid that penetrate the dura and communicate With
venous sinuses to return CSF back to venous circulation. Other pathways carry CSF along
cranial nerves and spinal nerve tracts to drain into extracranial lymphatic channels [11].

The cranium may be thought of as a rigid, non-distensible vessel ﬁlled With brain tissue, blood
and CSF, both ﬂuids being non-compressible. The MonrO-Kelli hypothesis states that an
increase in any one of these Will lead to an increase in ICP [12]. The process of cerebral
autoregulation serves to maintain a constant cerebral blood ﬂow in spite of Changing systemic
arterial pressure. This is realized by reactive Changes in arteriolar cross section and resulting
vascular resistance. Although this process affords some reserve, it can be overwhelmed.
Clinical causes of increased ICP thus include mass effects such as tumors and hematomas from
head trauma; generalize swelling of brain tissue from infection or other disease process;
increased blood ﬂow to the brain; increased venous pressure secondary to decreased blood
drainage from the cranium caused by downstream obstruction; and alterations in CSF production
or absorption. Given an otherwise healthy population, our discussion centers on ﬂuid dynamics
of blood and CSF regulation that might be altered in the weightless environment.

4.2.2 The Eye

"
"9","The sclera is the rigid, thick outer shell of the eye that in the adult does not expand With
increased intraocular volume. The anterior portion of the eye contains the anterior Chamber,
Which is ﬁlled With aqueous humor produced by the Ciliary body at the rate of about 3 microliters
per minute. This aqueous ﬂuid normally drains through the anterior chamber angle and into the
venous drainage system of the eye, specifically the episcleral veins. The central portion of the
eye is composed of the lens and Vitreous cavity, both of Which are noncompressible and stable in
volume. Posterior to the Vitreous is the retina. Between the retina and the sclera lies the choroid,
an extremely vascular tissue layer Which lacks autoregulation. The retinal nerve ﬁbers converge
to form the optic nerve head (disc) Which then becomes the optic nerve as it eXits the posterior
globe. The optic nerve is surrounded by three sheaths continuous With those enveloping the brain
(see above).

4.3 Theories for Observed Findings

Currently, the exact mechanisms causing the described physiological and anatomical Changes of
spaceﬂight ocular syndrome are unknown. However, many of the aforementioned ophthalmic
Changes are similar to those seen in Clinical patients on Earth With idiopathic intracranial
hypertension (11H), that is intracranial hypertension With no apparent cause. This leads to the
hypothesis that increased ICP could be causative or contributing to the observed Vision Changes
in astronauts. Mechanistically, this may occur as described below.

The subarachnoid space continues along the optic nerves Within the optic nerve sheath through
the posterior globe to the optic nerve head on the surface of the retina. Due to this
communication, When intracranial pressure increases, the optic nerve sheath is distended. This
causes ﬁbers in the optic nerve to be compressed, Which impedes venous drainage and
axoplasmic ﬂow in optic nerves, resulting in swelling of the optic nerve head (papilledema) [13].
The resulting ﬂattening of the globe of the eye, along With other retinal Changes including
choroidal folds, can cause signiﬁcant Visual disturbances by shortening the distance between the
lens and retina (macula) and Changing the aXial focus, as in 11H. A shortening of this distance
would lead to the hyperopic shifts that are observed.

An important difference between the spaceﬂight population and those With 11H is that in the
latter, patients typically manifest headaches, nausea, and vomiting along With Visual
perturbations and other symptoms. In the spaceﬂight ocular syndrome, the only presenting
symptom thus far is a shift in Visual acuity, With the exception of one subj ect’s transient scotoma.
With corrective lenses, there is essentially no functional impairment; subjects are Visually
corrected, feel well and maintain a high level of performance. Diagnostic criteria for IIH usually
specify an opening pressure obtained on lumbar puncture of >25 cm H20 [14] and those
presenting With symptoms are typically significantly higher. ICP has not yet been measured
during ﬂight. Although the four subjects that underwent lumbar puncture experienced ocular
Changes, only two of these exceeded the >25 cm H20 pressure criterion. Thus although IIH may
represent the closest analog to a terrestrial Clinical group, subj ects experiencing space ocular
syndrome represent a unique population. It is also noted that papilledema, a Clinical indicator of
increased ICP, is not completely coupled to Vision Changes. The most signiﬁcant papilledema

"
"10","seen in our subjects was not associated with measureable refractive change (case 3 in Table 1,
Figure 2).
The subarachnoid space around the optic nerve, especially in the Vicinity of the globe, may be
governed by local effects (e.g., translaminar pressure gradient across the optic disc (ICP-IOP or
Vice versa)) as well as global CSF pressure. A compartmentalization phenomenon might account
for the eye findings that would seem out of proportion to the relatively low ICP, as compared
with the IIH population with similar eye findings. An emerging theory of CSF regulation is that
some fraction is continually produced and absorbed throughout the anatomy supporting CSF
circulation [15]. In anatomical blind ends such as the optic nerve, the balance between
production and absorption may be disrupted by factors associated with spaceﬂight. Even a small
effect that is overwhelmed by gravitational or other factors inﬂuencing ﬂuid and vascular
regulation may be expressed and accumulate in the absence of gravity or the presence of other
spaceﬂight related factors.
The dynamic nature of the choroid in microgravity conditions has been hypothesized for many
years. The highly vascular choroid is drained by the vortex veins and is likely sensitive to
impeded outﬂow produced by microgravity. The evidence for this is largely based on the rather
abrupt increase in intraocular pressure (within 30 seconds) upon exposure to microgravity and
during head-down bed rest studies [16][17]. This supports the theory that several Changes may
take place in the eye during exposure to microgravity. These include choroidal expansion,
decreased choroidal blood ﬂow due to impaired venous drainage, elevated IOP, and perhaps a
predisposition for the choroid to permanently increase in volume in some subjects which may
lead to long standing choroidal folds and a concurrent hyperopic shift in refraction. A decrease
in distance between the macula and the lens due to choroid expansion could contribute to
degraded near Visual acuity.
In summary, when the subarachnoid space around the optic nerve is engorged with CSF and
presumably under pressure, the globe undergoes a shape change presumably due to this pressure,
and optic disc edema is frequently present. In addition, preliminary imagery analysis suggests
congestion and expansion of the delicate choroid layer, and nerve ﬁber layer thickening is seen.
With these observations, possible contributing factors associated with spaceﬂight have been
identified.
4.4 Possible Mechanisms and Contributing Factors
There are several conditions and adaptive changes associated with spaceﬂight that may
theoretically increase ICP. As such there may be multiple factors contributing to the spaceﬂight
ocular syndrome rather than a single etiology. Table 2 presents factors that may be causative or
associated.

4.4.1 Demographics
Based on the 11 documented cases, this syndrome does not appear to affect everyone equally.
Clear trends emerge upon analyzing the demographics of the affected astronauts. Thus far, all

"
"11","have been males over the age of 45 with a mesomorphic, muscular build. It is interesting to note
that idiopathic intracranial hypertension on Earth predominantly affects overweight women [18].
Age associated hyperopic shifts are well known, but without a gender dominance. In a large
cohort representing a normal terrestrial population of similar age range to the astronaut cases,
gender does not predict refractive Changes over time [19]. Also, 72% of this cohort showed
symmetry between eyes within 0.5 diopters. It is therefore suggestive that microgravity, along
with other secondary factors, is playing a central role in the alteration of anatomical and
physiological processes in the human body, selecting a different population for hyperopic shifts
as compared to terrestrial norms.

4.4.2 Cephalad Fluid Shift
Upon entry into weightlessness, a cephalad ﬂuid shift of approximately 2 L rapidly occurs [20].
This is ﬂuid normally resident in the lower venous circulation as well as interstitial tissue spaces
in the lower extremities, largely held in place along the gravitational vector associated with an
upright posture. In weightlessness, the gravitational gradient vanishes and venous pressure is
expected to equalize throughout the body. Subj ectively, crewmembers experience a sensation of
head fullness and nasal stufﬁness, and facial “pufﬁness” is frequently seen. The body perceives
this increase in central blood volume as a state of volume overload, and within the ﬁrst week of
spaceﬂight, plasma volume is decreased 10-15% [21] and red blood cell mass by 10% [22]. The
resulting adaptive decrease in Circulating blood volume to a new stable setpoint is associated
with a partial resolution of symptoms, though for some crewmembers facial puffiness may
persist throughout a long duration ﬂight.
Interestingly, in spite of this ﬂuid shift, central venous pressure actually decreases upon entry
into weightlessness, both in spaceﬂight [23] and in parabolic ﬂight [24]. This is most likely due
to an increase in thoracic diameter that also accompanies transition to weightlessness, leading to
an increase in thoracic volume and diminished intrapleural pressure [25]. Somewhat
paradoxically to the ﬁnding of decreased central venous pressure, the jugular veins are often
Visibly distended [26], and jugular vein cross section is increased on ultrasound examination
[27]. Jugular venous distension persists beyond the establishment of the new lower volume
setpoint, suggesting a possible obstruction of jugular venous drainage and resulting venous stasis
of the cerebral circulation.
Cerebral autoregulation appears to be preserved during spaceﬂight. Studies during the Neurolab
mission demonstrated preservation of cerebral blood ﬂow at one and two weeks into ﬂight, as
measured by Doppler ultrasound of the middle cerebral artery in response to an orthostatic
challenge (lower body negative pressure) [28]. Although this was a short duration ﬂight, most of
the vascular adaptation process had already occurred and the findings should Closely reﬂect a
long-term steady state. This suggests that the rise in ICP would be more likely related to
impaired cerebral venous drainage than increased arterial supply.
It is possible and likely that cephalad ﬂuid shift contributes to increased ICP as well as expansion
of the choroid upon entry into weightlessness and could contribute to the minor Vision Changes
experienced by short-duration astronauts. However, ﬂuid shift alone cannot explain Vision
Changes which most typically occur siX weeks to three months into a mission after blood volume
has been decreased signiﬁcantly. The time course suggests that local effects that inﬂuence

"
"12","Vision slowly build, possibly due to accumulating ﬂuid in the overall CSF volume or locally in
the subarachnoid space around the optic nerve due to impaired CSF drainage. A mild but
sustained increase in jugular venous pressure and resulting cerebral venous stasis may lead to
impaired CSF drainage as well as the choroidal expansion mentioned above.
Individual variability in vascular elasticity may also contribute to susceptibility to increased ICP
and/ or Visual impairment on-orbit. Elasticity refers to the ability of vessels and tissues to expand
and contract With volume Changes. In more rigid vessels, high pressure can be transmitted to
more sensitive structures, such as the brain or eyes, instead of being absorbed by the blood
vessels. It is therefore hypothesized that astronauts With more rigid vessels are at a greater risk
to increased ICP, and therefore Vision Changes.

4.4.3 Anatomical Shifts
Basic anatomical responses to microgravity including Changes in blood volume and pressure, and
cephalad organ shifting may all affect intracranial pressure to some degree. As described above,
the chest relaxes in weightlessness With a concomitant shape Change, increasing the volume of
the Closed chest cavity as thoracic organs drift upward [29]. The redistribution of intrathoracic
components could possibly result in obstruction of the proximal jugular vein, causing diminished
venous outﬂow and a subsequent increase in ICP. Weiner has proposed that shifting of the lungs
in a cephalad direction could raise the pulmonary apices to a position favorable for compression
of the proximal jugular against the clavicle [30]. This could explain the Visible distension of the
external jugular veins seen in weightlessness in spite of lower central venous pressure. The
resulting cerebral venous stasis may contribute to diminished CSF absorption, either globally or
locally around the SAS surrounding the optic sheath, as well as contributing to choroid
expansion.
It is also possible that a subj ect’s natural anatomy could predispose them to a higher increase in
ICP for a given change in intracranial volume. In 1985 , Ross [31] accounted for the random
nature of cerebral mountain sickness by suggesting that individuals With smaller ventricles and
cerebrospinal ﬂuid spaces have a greater increase in ICP for a given increase in volume in one of
the three intracranial components, reﬂecting an anatomical predisposition to intracranial
hypertension [31][32]. It is therefore possible that naturally smaller CSF spaces in some
astronauts could make them more susceptible to sustained 11H, causing Visual disturbances.

4.4.4 Increased Levels of Carbon Dioxide
The removal of metabolically produced carbon dioxide (C02) from a spacecraft environment is
an active process involving ventilation and sequestering onto an adsorbent bed. The subsequent
regeneration of the sorbent bed requires heating and release of the C02 overboard, or in advanced
systems, recycling to reclaim the oxygen. This processing Chain requires power and resources,
and spacecraft typically run a much higher concentration of C02 (approximately 0.5%) than
nominal atmospheric levels (0.039%) [33]. Generally, the on-board life support systems maintain
the C02 level below a symptomatic threshold. C02 levels were at normal operating levels (<5
mmHg) for all missions of the presented cases. However the allowable limits are Close enough to
this threshold that individual sensitiVities or regional ventilation anomalies not infrequently lead
to subjective symptoms of C02 increase, such as headache [34]. It is also possible that the
spaceﬂight population has a heightened sensitiVity to C02 due to adaptation to microgravity.

"
"13","Arterial C02, which correlates directly with ambient C02, is known to be a potent vasodilator
when elevated above physiologic norms, increasing cerebral blood ﬂow and contributing to
elevated ICP. In a study by Sliwka [35], subjects were exposed to ambient C02 levels of 0.7%
(5.3 mmHg) and 1.2% (9 mmHg) for 23 days. The lower level is just above the typical
spacecraft level, and is thought to be frequently encountered by crewmembers due to non-
uniform ventilation throughout the 188. Although ICP was not directly measured, for both levels
Doppler ultrasound measured cerebral blood ﬂow was elevated 35% above baseline during the
ﬁrst three days. Thereafter cerebral blood ﬂow normalized back to baseline values [35]. This
supports studies demonstrating that cerebral autoregulation is maintained after one and two
weeks in weightlessness [28]. Serial fundoscopic examination revealed no changes in retinal
vessels.
It is thus doubtful that elevated C02 has a direct contributory effect to the spaceﬂight ocular
syndrome. The body reacts to chronically elevated C02 by increasing bicarbonate levels to
maintain a normal acid base balance. The possible contribution of this mild metabolic
compensatory alkalosis is not known, but given that it is a unique physiologic circumstance of
space environments, this should be considered.

4.4.5 Resistive Exercise
In order to mitigate the loss of bone and muscle that occurs in weightlessness, crewmembers of
long-duration missions typically spend an hour and a half daily performing resistive exercise.
Implementation of the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) into the astronaut’s exercise
routine in 2008 has led some to believe that heavy weight lifting is partially responsible for
Visual impairment on-orbit. The ARED provides loads up to the equivalent of 600 lbs and allows
crewmembers to perform such exercises as dead lifts, squats, and heel raises. (This load value
may seem exaggerated until one considers that terrestrial exercises such as squats and heel raises
involve lifting the body weight, which is absent in weightlessness.) Heavy exertions are
associated with transient increases in mean arterial pressure and intrathoracic pressure, especially
when performed against a closed glottis as in a Valsalva maneuver as commonly performed by
weightlifters.
Exercise is generally associated with decreases in IOP, and this includes resistive training
episodes which are associated with acute decreases following repetitions of chest press and leg
press sets [36]. IOP begins to return to the baseline value within minutes of cessation of
exercise. A study by Dickerman, et a1. [3 7] of dynamic ocular pressures in power athletes
revealed signiﬁcant increases in IOP during maximal isometric contractions, with the presence
of conjunctival hemorrhages, supporting IOP increases as a reﬂection of increased retinal venous
pressure [37]. Vieira, et a1. [38] demonstrated an acute rise in IOP during exertion, using
electronic tonometry while subj ects performed chest presses [38], with 2 of 30 subj ects showing
a 10mmHg transient increase. This population consisted of health club participants, so may be
representative of the regularly exercising astronaut population, though averaging 20 years
younger.
These studies suggest that resistive exercise induces highly dynamic changes in IOP, the long
term effects of which are not fully understood. As there is no definitive research showing a
similar ocular syndrome in the weight lifting population to the one described in astronauts, this

"
"14","factor would have to compound uniquely with other physiologic processes and conditions of
weightlessness. Of note, four out of the 11 cases of Visual impairment described in this series
occurred before the ARED was ﬂown. A previous exercise device was available but capable of
less than half of the loading.

4.4.6 High Sodium Diet
Another contributing factor may be the high levels of sodium intake on-orbit. The direct
correlation between sodium intake and blood pressure is fairly well established, although the
overall role of dietary sodium in cardiovascular events and outcomes has been less certain [39].
Space food has historically been high in sodium, largely due to the preservation requirements for
onboard shelf life and use. The U.S. recommended daily sodium intake is 2,300 mg/day,
whereas astronauts on the ISS consume about 5,000 mg/day of sodium, with some crewmembers
exceeding 10,000 mg/day. How this may contribute to the space ocular syndrome is not Clear;
however studies have shown that low sodium diets along with weight-reduction have actually
reversed Vision loss in patients with IIH [40][41]. Clinical management of IIH typically involves
restriction of dietary sodium and weight loss diets. It should be stressed again that the 11H and
astronaut populations differ considerably, the former consisting largely of overweight females.
However it would seem prudent to make efforts to reduce onboard dietary sodium closer to a
terrestrial daily recommendation, and this is in fact underway at the J ohnson Space Center.
4.5 A New Aspect of Spaceﬂight Adaptation
Whatever the mechanism, spaceﬂight ocular syndrome occurs against the known backdrop of
physiologic adaptation to microgravity. Weightlessness is the dominant factor affecting the
human body during spaceﬂight, and adaptive Changes towards new set points help the body to
function more efﬁciently in this new environment. There is a fairly comprehensive
understanding of the overall physiologic response, both acute and long term. Figure 5
graphically depicts the physiologic responses of maj or systems over time, showing that each
system differs in manifesting clinical perceptions or impairment. Some of the more prominent
physiological effects of microgravity, such as space motion sickness, appear almost immediately.
As is seen, these adaptation processes generally stabilize and remain below the Clinical threshold
once a period of adaptation is completed.
Most adaptive Changes seem beneficial, and adaptation to weightlessness appears to be
optimized after a period of about 4-6 weeks. In general, people are able to live and work
effectively in space, performing cognitive tasks, ﬁne motor activities and heavy physical
exertions. Some Changes only become maladaptive upon return to Earth, notably
musculoskeletal degradation (leading to weakness, fracture risk), cardiovascular deconditioning
and decreased vascular volume (giving rise to postﬂight orthostatic hypotension), and
sensorineural adaptation (readaptation sickness). A small subset of the human body’s response
to weightlessness has a maladaptive character during ﬂight. This includes neurovestibular
response causing early space motion sickness and possible perception abnormalities, cephalad
ﬂuid shift causing head stufﬁness and headaches, and calcium spilling from bone resorption,
increasing the risk of kidney stones. However, symptoms of neurovestibular adaptation and ﬂuid
shift generally resolve after a few days, and only one case of inﬂight kidney stones has been seen
in 50 years of human space ﬂight [42].

"
"15","The newly recognized syndrome of decreased Visual acuity, elevated ICP, and ophthalmic
Changes represents a maladaptive aspect of spaceﬂight, and reminds the space medical
community of the possibilities of further entities yet to be Characterized. The newly added curve
to Figure 5 shows this syndrome breaching the Clinical horizon, becoming symptomatic in the
form of Visual acuity shift at the siX week mark, Which current observations suggest as a
reasonable average for time of onset. Although it is tempting to speculate on subclinical curves
for ICP increase, optic nerve distension and eye Changes, these must await further inﬂight
investigation to Characterize time course and degree. However, it is reasonable to assume that
the spaceﬂight ocular syndrome represents a common adaptive process involving cerebral
vascular and CSF circulation heretofore unrecognized. Fully Characterizing this syndrome may
further our basic physiologic understanding of CSF Circulation, unmasking more subtle effects
Which are otherwise dominated by gravitational inﬂuences.

5.0 Implications and Further Study

Vision Changes associated With spaceﬂight ocular syndrome can persist long after return to
Earth, if not permanently. It is important to emphasize once again that the Visual acuity shift
remains the only symptomatic aspect recognized thus far. Although Changes in Vision could
affect the ability of astronauts to perform mission critical tasks, the acuity shift is remediated
With corrective lenses, and subj ects remain fully functional. Some long-duration crewmembers
With this syndrome have subsequently ﬂown short-duration ﬂights With no further progression of
acuity shift or anatomical Changes. However, the implications of this syndrome on long term
health are yet to be elucidated, and participation in further long-duration ﬂight remains an open
question. As such, it is critical to fully characterize this syndrome in support of crew health and
identify its causative mechanisms as soon as possible. This should include preﬂight
identiﬁcation of individuals at particular risk and developing mitigation strategies.

Medical examinations targeted toward these ocular Changes must be implemented for the
spaceﬂight population, regardless of ophthalmic health, both pre and post-ﬂight. These should
include Visual acuity tests, high resolution retinal imagery, Visual ﬁeld assessment, and detailed
imagery of intracranial ophthalmic structures. This Will establish a detailed, normative baseline
of all structures involved in this phenomenon for comparison and determination of incidence and
severity. Inﬂight studies should include as a minimum serial assessment of Visual acuity, IOP
and retinal imagery. In addition to direct camera assessment of the retinal surface, NASA is
currently developing an in-ﬂight OCT capability that could provide early recognition of
microgravity-induced eye and optic nerve Changes. Inﬂight diagnostic ultrasound can show
intraorbital Changes such as globe ﬂattening and optic nerve sheath distension over time.

A key component of the spaceﬂight ocular syndrome may be elevated ICP, and this has been
measured in only four subj ects, in the post-ﬂight period. Arguably, routine direct assessment of
ICP pre- and post-ﬂight would be very useful in elucidating the mechanism. However, direct
assessment is currently obtained by lumbar puncture, a procedure not Without complications and
discomfort. With a non-impaired and fully functional population, the indication for lumbar
puncture becomes less clinical and more investigative. Undoubtedly, more measurements Will

"
"16","be obtained, but an obVious need is for a reliable method of noninvasive measurement of ICP
that can be validated and utilized both for ground and inﬂight studies. This is being actively
pursued in the space medical community.

Mitigation strategies will involve at a minimum inﬂight availability of corrective lenses to
accommodate hyperopic shifts, and this is currently standard on the 188. It is possible that
pharmaceutical agents may play a therapeutic role. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
acetazolamide is known to decrease CSF production as well as IOP, and has long been used in
the treatment of 11H. It is being considered for use in the spaceﬂight ocular syndrome, but may
have drawbacks. IOP is not known to increase during long-duration spaceﬂight and may
actually be decreased. A further selective reduction may induce a relative hypotonic condition
exacerbating deformation of the orbit if CSF pressure remains unchanged or high. In addition,
there is evidence that acetazolamide may increase the risk of nephrolithiasis [43]. Thus, in the
spaceﬂight population, acetazolamide must be used With caution.

Finally, although the relative contributions of the factors previously described have yet to be
determined, each may have a corrective component in mitigating the spaceﬂight ocular
syndrome. C02 levels may be decreased using more efﬁcient life support systems and lower
sodium inﬂight diets Will be ﬁelded in the near future. Exercise countermeasures might be
adjusted to avoid high transient ICP peaks. Methods to diminish the effects of cephalad ﬂuid
shifts, such as thigh cuffs [27] and lower body negative pressure, may be considered for
prevention or treatment. The most elegant mitigation for the cephalad ﬂuid shift of
weightlessness would of course be artiﬁcial gravity.

6.0 Conclusion

A newly recognized syndrome of Visual impairment, ophthalmic anatomical Changes and
increased intracranial pressure associated With long-duration spaceﬂight has been identiﬁed.
This syndrome seems to be weighted towards males, in Which it occurs With an incidence
approaching 50%. Visual acuity changes, in particular hyperopic shifts, remain the only
symptom With the exception of one crewmember With a transient scotoma, and crewmembers
remain fully functional With corrective lenses. The human spaceﬂight community should be
aware of this phenomenon and its implications, and Vigorous efforts must be made to determine
causative mechanisms and mitigation strategies.

It is likely that the spaceﬂight ocular syndrome originates from unrecognized physiologic
processes involved in adaptation to weightlessness. Clariﬁcation of these processes Will aid in
understanding the overall human response to spaceﬂight, and Will direct near-term investigations
on the 188. As long-duration ﬂight time continues to accumulate and more sophisticated
diagnostic tools become available, the discovery of additional phenomena relevant to human
adaptation are anticipated.

"
"17","References

[1] TH. Mader, CR. Gibson, A.F. Pass, LA. Kramer, A.G. Lee, J. Fogarty, W.J. Tarver, J.P.
Dervay, D.R. Hamilton, A. Sargsyan, J .L. Phillips, D. Tran, W. Lipsky, J . Choi, C. Stern, R.
Kuyumjian, J .D. Polk. Optic disc edema, globe ﬂattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic
shifts observed in astronauts after long-duration space ﬂight, Ophthalmology 118 (2011)
205 8-2069.

[2] LA. Kramer, A.E. Sargsyan, KM. Hasan, J .D. Polk, D.R. Hamilton, Orbital and
intracranial effects of microgravity: Findings at 3-T MR Imaging, Radiology 263 (3) (2012)
819-27 (Epub 2012 Mar 13).

[3] V1. Myasnikov, S.I. Stepanova, Features of cerebral hemodynamics in cosmonauts before
and after ﬂight on the MIR orbital station, in: Orbital Station MIR, Space Biology and
Medicine Vol. 2, Biomedical Experiments, Institute of Biomedical Problems of the Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 2008, pp. 300-304.

[4] SR. Zwart, CR. Gibson, T.H. Mader, K. Ericson, R. Ploutz-Snyder, M. Heer, S.M. Smith,
Vision Changes after spaceﬂight are related to alterations in Folate- and Vitamin B-12-
dependent 0ne-earb0n metabolism, J . Nutr. 142 (3) (2012) 427-431 (Epub 2012 Feb 1).

[5] G. Gray, S. Johnston, Medical Evaluations and Standards, in: MR. Barratt, S.L. P001 (Eds),
Principles of Clinical Medicine for Space Flight, Springer, New York, 2008.

[6] S.Q. Duntley, R.W. Austin, J .H. Taylor, J .L. Harris, Experiment S-8/D-13, Visual Acuity
and Astronaut Visibility, in: Gemini Midprogram Conference Including Experiment
Results, NASA, Washington, DC, 1966.

[7] W.R. Hawkins and J .F. Zieglsehmid, Clinical Aspects of Crew Health, in: RS. J ohnston,
L.F. Dietlein, CA. Berry (Eds), Biomedical Results of Apollo, US Government Printing
Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1975, pp. 43-81. NASA SP-368.

[8] W.H. Paloski, C.M. Oman, J.J. Bloomberg, M.F. Reschke, S]. Wood, D.L. Harm, B.T.
Peters, A.P. Mulavara, J .P. Locke, L.S. Stone, Risk of sensory-motor performance failures
affecting vehicle control during space missions: A review of the evidence, J . Gravit.
Physi01.15 (2) (2008).

[9] S. Griebel, G. Kosmorsky, Choroidal folds associated With increased intracranial pressure,
Am. J . Ophthalmol.129 (4) (2000) 513-516.

[10] J .J . Corbett, M.F. Mehta, Cerebrospinal ﬂuid pressure in normal obese subjects and patients

"
"18","With psedotumor cerebri, Neurology, 33 (10) (1983) 1386-1388.

[11] M. J ohnston, The importance of lymphatics in cerebrospinal ﬂuid transport, Lymphat. Res.
Biol. 1 (1) (2003) 41-4, discussion 45.

[12] B. Morki, The Monro—Kellie hypothesis: Applications in CSF volume depletion,
Neurology, 56 (2001) 1746-1748.

[13] CL. Gwinnutt, B. Saha, Cerebral blood ﬂow and intracranial pressure, Anaesthesia and
Intensive Care Medicine, 6 (5) (2005) 153-156.

[14] K. Digre, J . Corbett, Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri): A
reappraisal, Neurologist, 7 (2001) 2-67.

[15] D. Oreskovic, M. Klarica, The formation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid: nearly a hundred years of
interpretations and misinterpretations, Brain. Res. Rev. 64 (2010) 241-262.

[16] T. Mader, C. Gibson, M. Caputo, N. Hunter, G. Taylor, J . Charles, R. Meehan, Intraocular
pressure and retinal vascular Changes during transient exposure to microgravity, Am. J .
Ophthalmol. 115 (3) (1993) 347-350.

[17] T. Mader, G. Taylor, N. Hunter, M. Caputo, R. Meehan, Intraocular pressure, retinal
vascular, and Visual acuity Changes during 48 hours of 10 degrees head-down tilt, Aviat.
Space. Environ. Med. 61 (1990) 810-813.

[18] S. Dhungana, B. Sharrack, N. Woodroffe, Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, Acta.
Neurol. Scand. 121 (2010) 71-82.

[19] M. Guzowski, J . Wang, M. Rochtchina, K. Rose, P. Mitchell, Five-year refractive Changes
in an older population: The Blue Mountains Eye Study, Ophthalmology. 110 (7) (2003)
1364-1370.

[20] T. Moore, W. Thornton, Space shuttle inﬂight and postﬂight ﬂuid shifts measured by leg
volume Changes, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 58 (9 Pt 2) (1987) A91-96.

[21] CS. Leach, C.P. Alfrey, W.N. Suki, Regulation of body ﬂuid compartments during short-
term spaceﬂight, J. Appl. Physiol. 81 (1) (1996) 105-116.

[22] C. Alfrey, M. Udden, C. LeaCh-Huntoon, T. Driscoll, M. Pickett, Control of red blood cell
mass in spaceﬂight, J . Appl. Physiol. 81 (1) (1996) 98-104.

[23] J . Buckey, F. Gaffney, L. Lane, B. Levine, D. Watenpaugh, S. Wright, C. Yancy Jr, D.

"
"19","Meyer, C. Blomqvist, Central venous pressure in space, J . Appl. Physiol. 81 (1996) 19-25.

[24] R. Videbaek, P. Norsk, Atrial distension in humans during microgravity induced by
parabolic ﬂights, J . Appl. Physiol. 83 (1997) 1862-1866.

[25] M. Estenne, M. Gorini, A. Van Muylem, V. Ninane, M. Paiva, Rib cage shape and motion
in microgravity, J . Appl. Physiol. 73 (3) (1992) 946-954.

[26] W. Thornton, G. Hofﬂer, J . Rummel, Anthropometric changes and ﬂuid shifts, in:
Biomedical Results of Skylab, NASA, Washington, DC, 1977, pp. 330-338.

[27] S. Herault, G. Fomina, I. Alferova, A. Kotovskaya, V. Poliakov, P. Arbeille, Cardiac,
arterial and venous adaptation to weightlessness during 6-month MIR spaceﬂights With and
Without thigh cuffs (bracelets), Eur. J . Appl. Physiol. 81 (5) (2000) 384-390.

[28] K. Iwasaki, B. Levine, R. Zhang, J . Zuckerman, J . Pawelczyk, A. Diedrich, A. Ertl, J . COX,
W. Cooke, C. Giller, C. Ray, L. Lane, J . J . Buckey, F. Baisch, D. Eckberg, D. Robertson, 1.
Biaggioni, C. Blomqvist, Human cerebral autoregulation before, during, and after
spaceﬂight, J . Physiol. 579 (Pt 3) (2007) 799-810.

[29] R]. White, C.G. Blomqvist, Central venous pressure and cardiac function during
spaceﬂight, J . Appl. Physiol. 85 (2) (1998) 738-746.

[30] TC. Wiener, Space obstructive syndrome: intracranial hypertension, intraocular pressure,
and papilledema in space, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 83 (2012) 64-66.

[31] RT. Ross, The random nature of cerebral mountain sickness, Lancet, 1 (1985) 990-991.

[32] M.H. Wilson, J . Milledge, Direct measurement of intracranial pressure at high altitude and
correlation of ventricular size With acute mountain sickness: Brian Cummins’ results from
the 1985 Kishtwar expedition, Neurosurgery. 63 (2008) 970-975.

[33] J .T. J ames, The headache of carbon dioxide exposures, Society of Automotive Engineers,
Paper No. 07ICES-42, 2007.

[34] J . Law, S. Watkins, D. Alexander, In-ﬂight Carbon Dioxide Exposures and Related
Symptoms: Association, Susceptibility, and Operational Implications, NASA J ohnson
Space Center, Houston, TX, June 2010.

[35] U. Sliwka, J . Krasney, S. Simon, P. Schmidt, J . Noth, Effects of sustained low-level
elevations of carbon dioxide on cerebral blood ﬂow and autoregulation 0f the intracerebral
arteries in humans, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69 (3) (1998) 299-306.

"
"20","[36] J . Chromiak, B. Abadie, R. Braswell, Y. Koh, D. Chilek, Resistance training exercises
acutely reduce intraocular pressure in physically active men and women, J . Strength Cond.
Res. 17 (4) (2003) 715-720.

[37] R. Dickerman, G. Smith, L. Langham-Roof, W. McConathy, J . East, A. Smith, Intra-ocular
pressure Changes during maximal isometric contraction: does this reﬂect intra-cranial
pressure or retinal venous pressure?, Neurol. Res. 21 (3) (1999) 243-246.

[38] G. Vieira, H. Oliveira, D. de Andrade, M. Bottaro, R. Ritch, Intraocular pressure variation
during weight lifting, Arch. Ophthalmol. 124 (2006) 1251-1254.

[39] M. Alderman, Evidence relating dietary sodium t0 Cardiovascular Disease, J . Am. Coll.
Nutr. 25 (3) (2006) 2568-2618.

[40] I. Bekavac, S. G061, Transient, unilateral, complete, oculomotor palsy in an adult patient
With idiopathic intracranial hypertension, Signa Vitae, 6 (1) (2011) 44-46.

[41] B. Newborg, Pseudotumor cerebri treated by rice reduction diet, Arch. Intern. Med. 133
(1974) 802-807.

[42] V. Lebedev, Diary of a Cosmonaut: 211 Days in Space, Nauka I Zhizn, Moscow, 1983.
[English translation 01988 by the G.L.O.S.S. C0.; New York, NY: Bantam Books; 1990.]

[43] R. Tawil, R. Moxley, R. Griggs, Acetazolamide-induced nephrolithiasis. Implications for
treatment of neuromuscular disorders, Neurology. 43 (6) (1993) 1105.

"
"21","Acta Paper Captions Revision 12 Feb 2013

Figure 1: Fundoscopic picture of the back of the eye post-flight (R+19 days) showing a cotton wool spot (black
arrow) and choroidal folds (white arrow) (Source: NASA)

Please change to:

Figure 1: Fundoscopic picture of the back of the eye post-flight (R+19 days) showing a cotton wool spot (dark
arrow) and choroidal folds (light arrow) (Source: NASA)

Figure 2: Fundoscopic picture of the retina and optic disc taken postflight (R+5 days) showing grade 3 optic disc
edema (arrow) (Source: NASA)

No change

Figure 3: Pre-flight and post-flight MRI of the OD (right eye), showing significant flattening of the globe post-
flight, thought to be caused by increased ICP (Source: NASA)

No change

Figure 4: Post-flight MRI picture of the eye showing optic disc edema (red arrow), globe flattening (blue arrows)
and optic nerve sheath distension (yellow arrows) (Source: NASA)

Please change to:

Figure 4: Post-flight MRI picture of the eye showing optic disc edema (central vertical arrow), globe flattening
(short vertical arrows) and optic nerve sheath distension (horizontal arrows) (Source: NASA)

Figure 5: Physiologic changes of various systems during adaptation to microgravity (Source: NASA)

No change

"
"22","Table 1: Post-ﬂight ophthalmic changes seen in 11 cases presented by astronauts after long-duration

missions on-board the ISS. * = Cases that are also presented in Mader, et a1. [1], OD = Oculus Dexter

(right eye), OS = Oculus Sinister (left eye), Refraction change: Spherical equivalent, RNFL = Retinal

Nerve Fiber Layer, ONS = Optic Nerve Sheath, CSF = Cerebrospinal Fluid, R+n = 11 days after return to

earth (Source: NASA)

Case Refraction Change Choroidal RNFL Optic Cotton Globe ONS CSF
(Pre/Postﬂight) Folds Thickening Disc W001 Flattening Distension pressure
(OCT) Edema Spots (cmHZO)

1* OD:-1.50 OD:-1.25 Not Not Not
------n--""
2* OD:+O.75 OD:+2.00 Both eyes Present Grade OS OD and OD and Elevated

OS:+O.75 OS:+1.75 (OD>OS) I(OD>OS) OS OS 22 at R+66
days
26 at R+17
months
22 at R+19
months
3* OD:-O.50 ODzPlano Severe Grade 3 Elevated
OS:-O.25 OS:Plan0 (OD>OS) (OD), 21 at R+19
Grade 1 days
(OS)
4* OD:—1.00 OD:+O.50 Mild Grade 1 OD>OS OD>OS Elevated
OS:-O.25 OS:+O.50 (OD>OS) (OD) 28.5 at R+57
days
5* OD:—6.50 OD:-5.75 Mild/moderate OD and OD and Not
---------
6* OD:+O.25 OD:+1.75 Mild Grade 1 OS OD>OS OD>OS Not
.“HW-
7* OD:+1.25 OD:+2.75 Both eyes Moderate Grade 1 OD and OD and Elevated
OS:+1.25 OS:+2.50 (OD>OS) (OD and OS OS 28 at R+12
OS) days
OD:+1.50 OD:+1.50 Both eyes Mild Grade 1 OD and OD and Not
OS:+1.50 OS:+1.75 (OS>OD) (OD and OS OS measured
OS)
ODzPlano OD;+O.50 Mild (OD) Grade 1 OD and OD and Not
'--------
10 OD:+1.75 OD:+2.50 Not Not Not
---------W
11 OD:—O.50 ODzPlano Both eyes
OS:-O.75 OS: -O.25 (OS>OD) OD and OD and Not
OS OS Measured

"
"23","Research Highlights Revision
12 Feb 2013
o A syndrome of Vision and neuroanatomical Changes associated With spaceﬂight is
described.
0 Data from 11 individual cases in long duration astronauts are presented
0 Anatomy and physiology of the ﬁndings are discussed and reviewed
0 The current understanding of the cspaceﬂight ocular syndrome’ is offered

"
"24","-
Figure 1: Fundoscopic picture of the back of the eye post-ﬂight (R+19 days) showing a cotton wool spot
(black arrow) and choroidal folds (white arrow) (Source: NASA)
w
I
I
Figure 2: Fundoscopic picture of the retina and optic disc taken postﬂight (R+5 days) showing grade 3
optic disc edema (arrow) (Source: NASA)

"
"25","\\
o '1
Preflight OD Postflight OD
Figure 3: Pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight MRI of the OD (right eye), showing signiﬁcant ﬂattening of the globe
post-ﬂight, thought to be caused by increased ICP (Source: NASA)
Figure 4: Post-ﬂight MRI picture of the eye showing optic disc edema (red arrow), globe ﬂattening (blue
arrows) and optic nerve sheath distension (yellow arrows) (Source: NASA)

"
"26","Neurovestibular S stem
Fluids and Electrol tes
. . CardiovascularS stem “8'0""
Clinical
Horizon _ -_i______ ______________
I ’ Red Blood Cell Mass
09
Set ’ / Lean Bod Mass
Point - *‘m
¥—
1-9 // Bone and Calcium Radiation Effe
Set ‘ Metabolism _ M __ _. — -— - — ""’ ""'
Point
Time Scale (Months) 1 A 3 4 5 6
Point of Adaptation
Figure 5: Physiologic changes of various systems during adaptation to microgravity (Source: NASA)

"
