"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87
— ""17"""" / 2'"",
‘éfii3é‘T-21 Contents IIStS available at SCIVerse SolenceDIrect '

(5.6339351; ‘1‘"" ' .
v 1; 22;; Acta Astronautlca /
u ‘22::5. ‘ 1&3!"" 1'20}: ugh...— ’,/::;::;‘: {QR
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro {M} I'( Sf
—
Ophthalmlc Changes and 1ncreased 1ntracran1al pressure ® CrossMark
assoc1ated W1th long duratlon spaceﬂlght: An emerglng
understandlng
Karina Marshall—Bowman ‘3”), Michael R. Barratt 3"": C. Robert Gibson C
a NASA johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX 77058, USA
b Institute ofAerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Linder Héhe 1, Cologne 51147, Germany
C Wyle Science, Technology 8’ Engineering, Houston, TX, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: For many years, there have been anecdotal reports of vision changes by astronauts following
R€C€§V€d 23 May 2012 short and long—duration spaceﬂight. Much of this was attributed to hyperopic shifts related
Receww 1“ rEVISEd form to the age of the ﬂying population. However, it has recently been recognized that vision
23:31::31125}:nuary 2013 changes are actually quite common in astronauts and are associated with a constellation
Available online 15 February 2013 of ﬁndlngs 1ncluc11ng elevated Intraeranlel pressure, 01)th d1sc edema: globe ﬂattenlng, opt1c
— nerve sheath th1cl<en1ng, hyperoplc sh1fts and retlnal changes. W1th advanced lmaglng
Keywords: modalities available on the ground along with the ﬁdelity of in—ﬂight diagnostic capabilities
“.510“ Charlges previously unavailable, information on this newly recognized syndrome is accumulating. As
$130313an 5 aceﬂi ht of this writing, 11 cases of visual impairment experienced by astronauts during missions on—
Intrgcranial preiure g board the International Space Station (155) have been documented and studied. Although the
Optic disc edema exact mechanisms of the yision chenges are unknown, it is hypothesized that increased
Visual acuity Intracranlal pressure (ICP) 1s a contrlbutlng factor.
Retinal imaging Microgravity is the dominant cause of many physiological changes during spaceﬂight
Optical coherence tomography and is thought to contribute signiﬁcantly to the observed ophthalmic changes. However,
several secondary factors that could contribute to increased [CF and vision changes
in spaceﬂight have been proposed. Possible contributors include microgravity—induced
cephalad ﬂuid shift, venous obstruction due to microgravity—induced anatomical shifts,
high levels of spacecraft cabin carbon dioxide, heavy resistive exercise, and high sodium
diet. Individual susceptibility to visual impairment is not fully understood, though a
demographic of affected astronauts is emerging.
This paper describes the current understanding of this newly recognized syndrome,
presents data from 11 individual cases, and discusses details of potential contributing factors.
The occurrence of visual changes in long duration missions in microgravity is one of the most
signiﬁcant clinical issues to date for the human spaceﬂight community, and a comprehensive
understanding of the issue at whole is critical to ensure safe space exploration in the future.
© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of IAA.
1. Introduction
During the past 50 years of human spaceﬂight, a broad
— but incomplete understanding of the physiological and
* Correspondence to: Astronaut Ofﬁce, NASA Johnson Space Center/CB, anatomical changes that accompany adaptation to weight—
2101 NASA Parkway, Honston, TX 77058, USA.Te1.: +1 281 244 8209. lessness has been developed. The most pervasive ﬁndings,
E-mall addresses: I(ar1na.Marshall—Bowman@dlr.de , , , , , ,
(K. Marshall—Bowman), Michael.r.barratt@nasa.gov (MR. Barratt), mdUdlng headyvard ﬂmc} ShlftS, rEdUCtlon 1n blOOd VOlume
charles.gibson—1@nasa.gov (CR. Gibson). and altered ﬂuld regulatlon, muscle atrophy, and bone loss
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2013 Published by Elsevier Ltd. on behalf of IAA.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.01.014

"
"2","78 K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87

are fairly well characterized. However, as human ﬂight time beginning of human spaceﬂight. Between 1977 and
accrues and new investigative methods become available, 1991, 23% of applicants to NASA’s astronaut program
the knowledge of human acclimation to microgravity con— were medically disqualiﬁed, with 9.4% due to inadequate
tinues to expand and previously unrecognized phenomena vision [5]. Once selected, astronauts were subject to
are being discovered. In this paper we discuss a signiﬁcant ophthalmic examination, including visual acuity and
and recently characterized human response to microgravity. fundoscopy, before and after ﬂight.

For decades there have been sporadic anecdotal reports Some Mercury astronauts claimed that they were able
of vision Changes by both short (up to 2 weeks) and long— to see objects such as ships and airplanes with the naked
duration astronauts. Given the ﬂying population and their eye, suggesting that visual acuity is actually improved
age range, typically in their fourth to sixth decades, much of during spaceﬂight. These reports prompted Duntley et al.
this has been attributed to presbyopia exacerbated by [6] to test visual performance in Gemini astronauts
hyperopic (farsighted) shifts. However, it has recently been before, during, and after 8—14 days missions. Data from
recognized by the space medical community that visual in—ﬂight vision testing showed that visual acuity was
acuity Changes secondary to hyperopic shifts are actually neither improved nor degraded during or after spaceﬂight
common in astronauts and are associated with a consistent [6]. Hawkins and Ziegelschmid [7] found that the only
set of diagnostic ﬁndings. These include ﬂattening of the changes between pre— and post—ﬂight visual testing of
globe of the eye, retinal changes, and in some individuals, Apollo astronauts were in the superior, superior—nasal and
elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). With the exception of superior—temporal visual ﬁelds, which were constricted
visual acuity shifts, these ﬁndings have generally remained post—ﬂight. No changes in visual acuity were found [7].
below the symptomatic threshold, such that deliberate Interestingly, retinal vascular photography revealed a
diagnostic testing is required to identify the entire syndrome. decrease in vessel size at 3.5 h post—ﬂight. During the

This microgravity ocular syndrome (MOS), preliminarily Space Shuttle program, with the exception of contrast
named by the authors pending further elucidation of a sensitivity, in—ﬂight studies revealed minimal changes to
causative mechanism, appears to be fairly common in the vision [8].
long—duration ﬂight population [1—3]. As of this writing, 11 Subjective crew reports of vision Changes have been more
individuals participating in long—duration ﬂights on—board a hallmark of long—duration spaceﬂight. Although these were
the International Space Station (155), typically on the order of not experienced by astronauts in the US Skylab program, this
6 months, have presented with visual Changes and subclinical may be attributed to a low number of total participants (9
ﬁndings. With advanced pre— and postﬂight imaging mod— crewmembers) and fairly short ﬂights (28, 59, 84 days) as
alities now available, along with the recent introduction of compared with the Russian Mir or 155 programs. Missions to
new in—ﬂight diagnostic capabilities, information on this these platforms are typically on the order of 6 months,
newly recognized ocular syndrome is rapidly accumulating. corresponding in part to the on—orbit service life of the Soyuz
Although the exact causative mechanisms of these vision spacecraft. US crewmembers in these programs experienced
Changes are unknown, it is hypothesized that increased ICP a degradation in near visual acuity that occurred with enough
associated with headward ﬂuid shifts is a primary factor, regularity to ﬂy ‘anticipatory’ corrective lenses. It was
along with localized intraorbital effects that lead to ﬁndings recently revealed in a study by Myasnikov and Stepanova
out of proportion to the modest ICP elevations seen. In that 8 of 16 cosmonauts deliberately studied displayed optic
addition, several secondary factors of the spaceﬂight envir— disc edema after long—duration ﬂights aboard the Mir Space
onment may also contribute. These include the high levels of Station [3], suggesting that M05 is not a new development.
carbon dioxide in spacecraft cabins, heavy resistive exercise,
anthropomorphic Changes due to microgravity, and high 2.1.2. Survey information
sodium diet. Additionally, an enzymatic polymorphism in As subjective reports of vision changes accumulated, a
the 1—carbon metabolism cycle has recently been identiﬁed re—examination of the standard post—ﬂight medical survey
as a factor associated with the observed vision changes, but is was undertaken. Results were analyzed for approximately
not clear if this is causative or contributory [4]. Individual 300 NASA astronauts over more than 500 ﬂight experi—
susceptibility to ophthalmic Changes and visual impairment ences, revealing that vision changes associated with
is currently unknown, though a deﬁning demographic of both short and long—duration spaceﬂight are common.
affected astronauts is emerging. The observed pathophysio— Approximately 23% of short—duration Shuttle astronaut
logical phenomena are complex and it is likely that the ﬂight experiences were associated with subjective degra—
etiology is multifactorial. This paper describes what is dation in near vision, with 11% showing documented
currently known about this syndrome, its implications and post—ﬂight refraction changes. In the long—duration popu—
risk, and directions for future study. lation, nearly 50% of astronaut ﬂight experiences on

155 missions showed near vision degradation, with
2. Subjects, materials and methods 34% showing documented refraction changes post—ﬂight.
These signiﬁcant ﬁndings are reported in the landmark
2.1. Recognition of the syndrome article by Mader, et al. [1] that ﬁrst describes this ocular
syndrome.
2.1.1. Historical review

Until recently, there has been little formal documenta— 2.1.3. Diagnostic modalities
tion of vision changes in astronauts, despite occasional As evidence of visual impairment associated with
anecdotal reports of visual disturbances since the spaceﬂight accumulated, NASA began to take a more

"
"3","K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87 79
aggressive approach to the issue. Standard pre— and post— The observation of optic disc edema on retinal imagery
ﬂight eye examinations have consisted of visual acuity Clinically suggests elevated ICP, and the overall syndrome
assessment, refraction, intraocular pressure (IOP) mea— likely includes this condition. However currently, ICP can
surements, and direct fundoscopic retinal visualization only be ascertained via direct measurement and therefore
during dilated examination. Newly available imaging has not been assessed inﬂight. The opening cerebrospinal
modalities were recruited to study speciﬁc anatomic areas ﬂuid pressure (a measurement of ICP) was obtained in 4
of interest. Ophthalmic examinations before and after individuals of this initial series during a postﬂight spinal
ﬂight were expanded in 2009 to include 3T orbital tap, although this is not a routine procedure.
magnetic resonance imaging (3T MRI), showing the eye,
optic nerve/sheath and other surrounding structures in 3, Results: description of cases
great detail. In addition, optical coherence tomography
(OCT), which provides high resolution trans—pupil ima— As of July, 2012, 11 cases of microgravity ocular
gery Of the retinal layers and Optic diSC, was added. Pre— syndrome have been documented in [SS crewmembers
and postﬂight OCT studies are highly sensitive to many Of (ﬁndings summarized in Table 1), This number is
the anatomical changes associated With this syndrome, expected to change as more speciﬁc criteria for diagnosis
SUCh 35 minute nerve ﬁber layer thickening. are developed and crewmembers that ﬂew missions

Inﬂight diagnostic and monitoring capabilities were 3150 before the recognition of this syndrome are examined
added. During a recent 155 ﬂight, tWO long—duration physi— more closely. All cases have occurred in male astronauts
cian crewmembers noted degradation of near visual acuity while ﬂying 6—month missions on—board the 155, Visual
several WEEkS into ﬂight, requiring stronger C01T€CtiV€ acuity shift was reported in a time window of 3 weeks to
lenses for reading and C1056 in—cabin WOl‘k. Both crewmem— 3 months into the mission, It is noted that visual acuity
bers remained fully correctable and were otherwise without shifts tend to plateau and not progress beyond 3—4
symptoms. One of these crewmembers also reported a months.
right—sided transparent but noticeable visual defect, roughly The anatomical ﬁndings in these cases are not uni—
in the shape of a vertical crescent. Ground biomedical versally associated with vision changes, Case 3 (Fig, 2),
51113130?t teams and other 139130111191 were able to obtain however, is notable; this individual demonstrated the
and rapidly ﬂight—certify a laptop based retinal imagery greatest degree of optic disc edema, but had no reported
camera and software package (Pl‘OViZiOHTM). With real time or measured visual change, All others demonstrated a
guidance from ground specialists, the ﬁl‘St ultrasound degradation of near visual acuity in one or both eyes. Case
images showing these eye Changes in microgravity were 6 did not notice changes in visual acuity during ﬂight, but
obtained. Both direct retinal imagery and eye ultrasound are these were demonstrated postﬂight. 10p was 3150 mea—
now standard inﬂight monitoring Pl‘OCEdUI‘ES- sured pre— and post—ﬂight, and was found to decrease
Table 1
Post—ﬂight ophthalmic Changes seen in 1 1 cases presented by astronauts after long—duration missions on—board the 155. *= Cases that are also presented
in Mader et a1. [1], OD: Oculus Dexter (right eye), OS: Oculus Sinister (left eye), Refraction Change: Spherical equivalent, RNFL: Retinal Nerve Fiber
Layer, ONS: Optic Nerve Sheath, CSF: Cerebrospinal Fluid, R+n= 11 days after return to earth .

Source: NASA.
Case Refraction change Choroidal RNFL Optic disc Cotton Globe ONS CSF pressure (cm H20)
(Pre—lPostﬂight) folds thickening edema wool ﬂattening distension
(OCT) spots
1* OD: —1.50 OD:—1.25 OD — — OD Not Not Not measured
OS: —2.25 OS:—2.50 assessed assessed
2* OD: +0.75 OD: +2.00 Both eyes Present Grade OS OD and OD and OS Elevated 22 at R+ 66 days 26 at
OS:+0.75 OS:+1.75 (OD > OS) 1(OD > OS) OS R+17 months 22 at R+19 months
3* OD: —0.50 OD2Plano — Severe Grade 3 (OD), — — OD Elevated 21 at R+ 19 days
OS: —0.25 OS:Plano (OD > OS) Grade 1 (OS)
4* OD: —1.00 OD:+0.50 OD Mild Grade 1 (OD) — OD > OS OD > OS Elevated 28.5 at R+57 days
05: —o.25 os: +0.50 (OD > OS)
5* OD:—6.50 OD:—5.75 — Mild/ — — OD and OD and OS Not measured
OS:—5.75 052—550 moderate OS
(0D)
6* OD:+0.25 OD:+1.75 OD Mild Grade 1 (OD) OS OD > OS OD > OS Not measured
OS:Plano OS: + 1.00
7* OD:+1.25 OD:+2.75 Both eyes Moderate Grade 1 (OD — OD and OD and OS Elevated 28 at R+ 12 days
os:+1.25 os:+2.5o (OD > OS) and OS) 05
8 OD:+1.50 OD:+1.50 Both eyes Mild Grade 1 (OD — OD and OD and OS Not measured
os:+1.5o os:+1.75 (os > OD) and OS) 05
9 OD2Plano OD;+0.50 — Mild (OD) Grade 1 (OD) — OD and OD and OS Not measured
OS:Plano OS: +0.50 OS
10 OD:+1.75 OD:+2.50 — — — OD Not Not Not measured
OS:+1.75 OS:+2.25 assessed assessed
1] OD:—0.50 OD2Plano Both eyes _ _ _ OD and OD and OS Not measured
052—075 05: —o.25 (OS>OD) os

"
"4","80 K. Marshall—Bowman et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87
slightly in 4/11 cases. It is interesting to note that edema was observed in 7/11 cases, ranging from grade 1
majority of the ﬁndings occurred to a greater degree, to grade 3, again primarily in the right eye (Fig. 2). Cotton
and many times solely in the right eye (OD). wool spots, areas of localized damage to retinal nerve
OCT was used to assess the presence of choroidal folds, ﬁbers caused by retinal swelling and resulting stasis of
retinal nerve ﬁber layer (RNFL) thickness, and optic disc axonal transport, were found in 4/ 11 cases.
edema. Retinal nerve ﬁber layer thickening was observed Postﬂight magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies
in 8/11 cases, ranging from mild to severe. Dilated were performed on 9 of the 11 astronauts. Globe ﬂatten—
fundoscopic examinations post—ﬂight also revealed the ing (Figs. 3 and 4) was observed in all but one of these,
presence of choroidal folds, optic disc edema, and cotton and optic nerve sheath (ONS) distension was seen in all
wool spots (Figs. 1 and 2), consistent with OCT ﬁndings. cases (Fig. 4).
Choroidal folds, parallel striae in the posterior pole of the Although inﬂight images are not reproduced here, retinal
choroid that may be associated with increased ICP [9], images obtained by crewmembers have been of sufﬁcient
were found in 7/11 astronauts post—ﬂight. Optic disc quality to demonstrate optic disc edema. In addition, eye
ultrasound, performed under real—time guidance by ground
specialists, has produced high quality images that demon—
strate globe ﬂattening and optic nerve sheath distension.
This has corroborated ground studies and established these
modalities as viable in—ﬂight diagnostic capabilities.
. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) opening pressure, a measure
5:"" RN .- ' y w of intracranial pressure, was assessed postﬂight via lumbar
_- ‘ _. -. - \e.‘ *_ ’ : "" puncture in four astronauts presenting with optic disc
1:, ' 1’ _- L .13” . it . . 'x' ' edema. Clinically, idiopathic intracranial hypertension is
$3- ' _I. ‘. _ I f - diagnosed with an opening pressure greater than 25.0 cm
”'21."" I ’ "" ‘ H20. However, most cases in the clinical population pre—
"" '_- ‘H 1"" 5 senting with symptomatic intracranial hypertension have
‘ _ J an ICP well above this opening pressure [10]. All astronauts
._ ' . 5"" that were tested showed apparent elevations of CSF
‘ . 1' 1 pressure, up to 28.5 cm H20 even after 57 days post—
i F- ‘. .‘ - . , ' ﬂight. Arguably these are within clinical normal values in
_ ' _ two and mildly elevated on the other two, but certainly
is .., 5’ higher than would be expected for an otherwise normal
—. L . 3‘ population. Unfortunately, no preﬂight baselines were
I a <—-—— "" obtained in any crewmembers for deﬁnitive comparison.
. , . Determining the incidence of microgravity ocular syn—
4' ' ' .. .- - drome is dependent on when in time the ﬁndings were ﬁrst
' - - ’ ‘ thoroughly documented and the extent of investigation of
subsequent crewmembers. Using 27 as a denominator
Fig. 1. Fundoscopic picture of the back of the eye post—ﬂight (R+ 19 days) (dEtermmEd by u51ng Case 1 and all SUbsquent US SEgment
showing a cotton wool spot (dark arrow) and choroidal folds (light arrow). crewmembers thrOUgh JUIY Of 2012) yldds an overall
Source: NASA. incidence of 40% (50% for male crewmembers). Although
diagnostic criteria differ, this is consistent with the observa—
.. . tion by Myasnikov and Stepanova [3] and with the near
‘ . . -‘ a . vision compromise in long duration crewmembers reported
. i 1-” by Mader et al. [1]. As new tools are applied to detect more
- -~. I subtle ﬁndings of eye and related CNS anatomy, and as the
diagnostic criteria are settled over next few years, more
‘ - .t ! exact incidence rates will be determined. It is too early to
tell whether these shifts are permanent. Crewmembers
have experienced varying degrees of return of near visual
acuity to preﬂight levels. On the other hand, these changes
may persist for years post—ﬂight, suggesting that acuity
'- ‘ shifts and other anatomic perturbations may be permanent.
4. Discussion
4.1. History vs. present
Even though the majority of vision changes have been
Fig. 2. Fundoscopic picture of the retina and optic disc taken postﬂight “Oteq m aStronaUtS Wlthm the past few years, 1t 15 almOSt
(R+5 days) showing grade 3 optic disc edema (arrow). certain that changes to ophthalmic anatomy and physiol—
Source: NASA. ogy have been occurring since the beginning of human

"
"5","K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87 81
I '
Fig. 3. Pre—ﬂight and post—ﬂight MRI of the OD (right eye), showing signiﬁcant ﬂattening of the globe post—ﬂight, thought to be caused by increased ICP.
Source: NASA.
2000, when ﬂights to the ISS began, the mean astronaut
age was 38, whereas as of 2011 it was 46.7, possibly
contributing to an increased susceptibility to visual
impairment due to expected age—related hyperopic shifts
and presbyopia. It can also be noted that visual impair—
ment occurs more frequently and to a greater degree in
long—duration missions (6+ months) compared to short
missions (up to 2 weeks).
4.2. Anatomical review
A brief discussion of CSF circulation and eye anatomy
follows.
4.2.1. The intracranial space
The brain is enclosed by three membranous layers; the
outer dura, which conforms to the inner surface of the
cranium; the arachnoid, which does not follow the surface
of the brain but comprises a loosely ﬁtting sac; and
the pia, which is closely conformal to the brain surface,
following its convolutions and contours. CSF ﬂows
between the arachnoid and pia, contained in the subar-
achnoid space. The classical understanding is that CSF is
Fig. 4. Post—ﬂight MRI picture of the eye showing optic disc edema produced in the choroid plexus, vascular structures that
(centralvertical arrow),globe ﬂattening(short vertical arrows)and optic line the ventricles Of the brain and allow plasma to ﬁlter
nerve sheath d15ten510n (honzontal arrows). , , , , ,
Source. NASA select1vely from cap1llary blood 1nto the CSF c1rculatlon,
as well as around blood vessels in direct contact with
the subarachnoid space (SAS). From this system, CSF is
spaceﬂight. The recent recognition of this phenomenon is absorbed back into blood circulation via several routes.
largely based on new assessment tools that have allowed The primary route is thought to be via arachnoid granula—
for more complete characterization of this syndrome and tions, small protrusions of the arachnoid that penetrate
revealed anatomical ﬁndings previously unknown and the dura and communicate with venous sinuses to return
undocumented. More accurate and reliable cycloplegic CSF back to venous circulation. Other pathways carry CSF
refraction exams were only started in recent years. Also, along cranial nerves and spinal nerve tracts to drain into
implementation of pre— and post—ﬂight 3T MRI of the eye extracranial lymphatic channels [11].
and OCT has enabled documentation of small anatomical The cranium may be thought of as a rigid, non—
changes, providing contributing pieces of the larger syn— distensible vessel ﬁlled with brain tissue, blood and CSF,
drome. Notably, Kramer et al. describe the spectrum of both ﬂuids being non—compressible. The Monro—Kelli
intraorbital and intracranial ﬁndings from 3T MRI of 27 hypothesis states that an increase in any one of these
astronauts who had been exposed to microgravity [2]. will lead to an increase in ICP [12]. The process of cerebral
It is also interesting to note that the demographic of autoregulation serves to maintain a constant cerebral
the astronaut population has changed over time. Prior to blood ﬂow in spite of changing systemic arterial pressure.

"
"6","82 K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87
This is realized by reactive changes in arteriolar cross An important difference between the spaceﬂight popula—
section and resulting vascular resistance. Although this tion and those with IIH is that in the latter, patients typically
process affords some reserve, it can be overwhelmed. manifest headaches, nausea, and vomiting along with visual
Clinical causes of increased ICP thus include mass effects such perturbations and other symptoms. In the microgravity
as tumors and hematomas from head trauma; generalize ocular syndrome, the only presenting symptom thus far is a
swelling of brain tissue from infection or other disease shift in visual acuity, with the exception of one subject’s
process; increased blood ﬂow to the brain; increased venous transient scotoma. With corrective lenses, there is essentially
pressure secondary to decreased blood drainage from the no functional impairment; subjects are visually corrected,
cranium caused by downstream obstruction; and alterations feel well and maintain a high level of performance. Diagnos—
in CSF production or absorption. Given an otherwise healthy tic criteria for IIH usually specify an opening pressure
population, our discussion centers on ﬂuid dynamics of blood obtained on lumbar puncture of > 25 cm H20 [14] and those
and CSF regulation that might be altered in the weightless presenting with symptoms are typically signiﬁcantly higher.
environment. ICP has not yet been measured during ﬂight. Although the
four subjects that underwent lumbar puncture experienced
4 2 2 The e e ocular changes, only two of these exceeded the > 25 cm H20
' ' ' y . . . . pressure criterion. Thus although IIH may represent the
The sclera is the rigid, thick outer shell of the eye that . . . . .
. . . . Closest analog to a terrestrial Clinical group, subjects experi—
1n the adult does not expand With increased 1ntraocular . . .
. . . enc1ng space ocular syndrome represent a unique population.
volume. The anterior portion of the eye contains the . . . . . .
. . . . It 15 also noted that papilledema, a Clinical indicator of
anterior chamber, Wthh is ﬁlled w1th aqueous humor . . . .
. . . increased ICP, 15 not completely coupled to Vision changes.
produced by the c111ary body at the rate of about 3 ul/mm. . . . . .
. . . . The most Signiﬁcant papilledema seen in our subjects was
This aqueous ﬂu1d normally dra1ns through the anterior . . . .
. . not assoc1ated w1th measureable refractive change (case 3 in
chamber angle and into the venous drainage system of the Table 1. Pi 2)
eye, speciﬁcally the episcleral veins. The central portion of ’ g. ' . .
. . . The subarachn01d space around the optic nerve, espe—
the eye is composed of the lens and v1treous cav1ty, both . . . . .
. . . c1ally 1n the v1c1n1ty of the globe, may be governed by local
of Wthh are noncompreSSIble and stable in volume. . . .
. . . . . effects (e.g., translam1nar pressure gradient across the optic
Posterior to the v1treous is the retina. Between the retina . .
. . disc (ICP—IOP or Vice versa)) as well as global CSF pressure.
and the sclera lies the chor01d, an extremely vascular . . .
. . . . A compartmentalization phenomenon might account for
tissue layer Wthh lacks autoregulation. The ret1nal nerve . .
. . . the eye ﬁndings that would seem out of proportion to the
ﬁbers converge to form the optic nerve head (disc) Wthh . . .
. . . . relatively low ICP, as compared With the IIH population
then becomes the optic nerve as it ex1ts the posterior . . . . .
. . With Similar eye ﬁndings. An emerging theory of CSF
globe. The optic nerve is surrounded by three sheaths . . . . .
continuous with those envelo in the brain (see above) regulation is that some fraction is continually produced
p g ' and absorbed throughout the anatomy supporting CSF
circulation [15]. In anatomical blind ends such as the optic
4.3. Theories for observed ﬁndings nerve, the balance between production and absorption
may be disrupted by factors associated with spaceﬂight.
Currently, the exact mechanisms causing the described Even a small effect that is overwhelmed by gravitational or
physiological and anatomical changes of microgravity other factors inﬂuencing ﬂuid and vascular regulation may
ocular syndrome are unknown. However, many of the be expressed and accumulate in the absence of gravity or
aforementioned ophthalmic changes are similar to those the presence of other spaceﬂight related factors.
seen in clinical patients on Earth with idiopathic intra— The dynamic nature of the choroid in microgravity con—
cranial hypertension (IIH), that is intracranial hyperten— ditions has been hypothesized for many years. The highly
sion with no apparent cause. This leads to the hypothesis vascular choroid is drained by the vortex veins and is likely
that increased ICP could be causative or contributing to sensitive to impeded outﬂow produced by microgravity. The
the observed vision changes in astronauts. Mechanisti— evidence for this is largely based on the rather abrupt
cally, this may occur as described below. increase in intraocular pressure (within 30 5) upon exposure
The subarachnoid space continues along the optic to microgravity and during head—down bed rest studies
nerves within the optic nerve sheath through the poster— [16,17]. This supports the theory that several Changes may
ior globe to the optic nerve head on the surface of the take place in the eye during exposure to microgravity. These
retina. Due to this communication, when intracranial include choroidal expansion, decreased choroidal blood ﬂow
pressure increases, the optic nerve sheath is distended. due to impaired venous drainage, elevated IOP, and perhaps a
This causes ﬁbers in the optic nerve to be compressed, predisposition for the choroid to permanently increase in
which impedes venous drainage and axoplasmic ﬂow in volume in some subjects which may lead to long standing
optic nerves, resulting in swelling of the optic nerve head choroidal folds and a concurrent hyperopic shift in refraction.
(papilledema) [13]. The resulting ﬂattening of the globe of A decrease in distance between the macula and the lens due
the eye, along with other retinal changes including to choroid expansion could contribute to degraded near
choroidal folds, can cause signiﬁcant visual disturbances visual acuity.
by shortening the distance between the lens and retina In summary, when the subarachnoid space around the
(macula) and changing the axial focus, as in IIH. A short— optic nerve is engorged with CSF and presumably under
ening of this distance would lead to the hyperopic shifts pressure, the globe undergoes a shape change presumably
that are observed. due to this pressure, and optic disc edema is frequently

"
"7","K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87 83
present. In addition, preliminary imagery analysis sug— spaceﬂight, plasma volume is decreased 10—15% [21] and
gests congestion and expansion of the delicate choroid red blood cell mass by 10% [22]. The resulting adaptive
layer, and nerve ﬁber layer thickening is seen.With these decrease in Circulating blood volume to a new stable
observations, possible contributing factors associated setpoint is associated with a partial resolution of symp—
with spaceﬂight have been identiﬁed. toms, though for some crewmembers facial pufﬁness may

persist throughout a long duration ﬂight.
. . . . Interestingly, in spite of this ﬂuid shift, central venous
44' P0551ble mechanisms and contrzbutmgfactors pressure actually decreases upon entry into weightless—
, , , ness, both in spaceﬂight [23] and in parabolic ﬂight [24].
, There are several conditions and adaptive changes 3550' This is most likely due to an increase in thoracic dia—
c1ated w1th spaceﬂight that .may theoretically increase ICP. As meter that also accompanies transition to weightlessness,
5’th there may be multiple factors contributing to the leading to an increase in thoracic volume and diminished
m1crograv1ty ocular syndrome rather than e smgle “1910831 ' intrapleural pressure [25]. Somewhat paradoxically t0 the
Table 2 presents factors that may be causative 0r assoc1ated. ﬁnding of decreased central venous pressure, the jugular
veins are often visibly distended [26], and jugular vein
4-4-1- Demographics cross section is increased on ultrasound examination [27].
Based on the 11 documented cases, thiS syndrome Jugular venous distension persists beyond the establish—
does not appear to affect everyone equally. Clear trends ment of the new lower volume setpoint, suggesting a
emerge upon 311313121118 the demographics 0f the affected possible obstruction of jugular venous drainage and
astronauts. Thus far, 311 have been males over the age 0f resulting venous stasis 0f the cerebral Circulation.
45 Wlth a mesomorphic, muscular blllld. It iS interesting Cerebral autoregulation appears to be preserved during
to note that idiopathic intracranial hypertension on Earth spaceﬂight. Studies during the Neurolab mission demon—
predominantly affects overweight women [181- Age 3550- strated preservation of cerebral blood ﬂow at 1 and 2 weeks
ciated hyperopic shifts are well khOWh, hilt WithOUt a into ﬂight, as measured by Doppler ultrasound of the middle
gender dominance. In a large C0h01‘t representing a cerebral artery in response to an orthostatic challenge
normal terrestrial population of similar age range to the (lower body negative pressure) [28]. Although this was a
astronaut cases, gender does h0t predict refractive short duration ﬂight, most of the vascular adaptation
changes over time [191- A150, 72% Of this C0h01‘t showed process had already occurred and the ﬁndings should
symmetry between eyes within 0-5 diopter. It is therefore Closely reﬂect a long—term steady state. This suggests that
suggestive that microgravity, 310118 With other secondary the rise in ICP would be more likely related to impaired
factors, iS playing a central role in the alteration 0f cerebral venous drainage than increased arterial supply.
anatomical and physiological processes in the human It is possible and likely that cephalad ﬂuid shift con—
body, selecting a different 1301311133011 f01‘ hyperopic shifts tributes to increased ICP as well as expansion of the
35 compared to terrestrial norms. choroid upon entry into weightlessness and could contri—
bute t0 the minor vision changes experienced by short—
4.4.2. Cephalad ﬂuid shift duration astronauts. However, ﬂuid shift alone cannot
Upon entry into weightlessness, a cephalad ﬂuid shift explain vision changes which most typically occur 6 weeks
of approximately 21 rapidly occurs [20]. This is ﬂuid to 3 months into a mission after blood volume has been
normally resident in the lower venous Circulation as well decreased signiﬁcantly. The time course suggests that local
as interstitial tissue spaces in the lower extremities, effects that inﬂuence vision slowly build, possibly due to
largely held in place along the gravitational vector asso— accumulating ﬂuid in the overall CSF volume or locally in
ciated with an upright posture. In weightlessness, the the subarachnoid space around the optic nerve due to
gravitational gradient vanishes and venous pressure is impaired CSF drainage. A mild but sustained increase in
expected to equalize throughout the body. Subjectively, jugular venous pressure and resulting cerebral venous
crewmembers experience a sensation of head fullness and stasis may lead to impaired CSF drainage as well as the
nasal stufﬁness, and facial “pufﬁness” is frequently seen. choroidal expansion mentioned above.
The body perceives this increase in central blood volume Individual variability in vascular elasticity may also
as a state of volume overload, and within the ﬁrst week of contribute to susceptibility to increased ICP and/or visual
Table 2
Possible factors contributing to the visual disturbances seen in astronauts.
Potential Contributing Factor Contribution to Vision Changes
Demographics; male predominance, May be associated with age—related hyperopic shifts
advanced age
Cephalad ﬂuid shift Increased intracranial ﬂuid volume
Anatomical shifts and anatomical Cephalad thoracic organ shifting possibly impairing cerebral venous and/or CSF drainage Naturally smaller
predisposition ventricles, smaller optic disc, stiffer vessels 2 greater susceptibility to increased ICP
High levels of carbon dioxide Vasodilation; increased cerebral blood ﬂow
Resistive exercise Transient, large increases in intrathoracic and intracranial pressure
High sodium diet Vascular volume expansion, unknown contribution to ICP

"
"8","84 K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87
impairment on—orbit. Elasticity refers to the ability of possible that the spaceﬂight population has a heightened
vessels and tissues to expand and contract with volume sensitivity to C02 clue to adaptation to microgravity.
changes. In more rigid vessels, high pressure can be Arterial C02, which correlates directly with ambient
transmitted to more sensitive structures, such as the C02, is known to be a potent vasodilator when elevated
brain or eyes, instead of being absorbed by the blood above physiologic norms, increasing cerebral blood ﬂow
vessels. It is therefore hypothesized that astronauts with and contributing to elevated ICP. In a study by Sliwka
more rigid vessels are at a greater risk to increased ICP, et al. [35], subjects were exposed to ambient C02 levels of
and therefore vision changes. 0.7% (5.3 mmHg) and 1.2% (9 mmHg) for 23 days. The
lower level is just above the typical spacecraft level, and is
. . thou ht to be fre uentl encountered b crewmembers
4.4.3. Anatomical ShlftS g . q y . . y
. . . . . . clue to non—uniform ventilation throughout the ISS.
Ba51c anatom1cal responses to m1crograv1ty including .
. Although ICP was not directly measured, for both levels
changes in blood volume and pressure, and cephalad
. . . . Doppler ultrasound measured cerebral blood ﬂow was
organ shifting may all affect 1ntracran1al pressure to some 0 . .
. . . elevated 35/0 above baseline during the ﬁrst 3 days.
degree. As described above, the chest relaxes in weight— .
. . . . Thereafter cerebral blood ﬂow normalized back to base—
lessness With a concomitant shape change, increasmg the . . . .
. . . line values [35]. This supports studies demonstrating that
volume of the closed chest cav1ty as thorac1c organs drift . . . .
. . . . . cerebral autoregulation 1S maintained after l and 2 weeks
upward [29]. The redistribution of 1ntrathorac1c compo— . . . . . .
. . . . 1n weightlessness [28]. Serial fundoscopic examination
nents could p0551bly result in obstruction of the prox1mal . .
. . . . . . revealed no changes in retinal vessels.
Jugular vein, causmg diminished venous outﬂow and a . .
. . . It IS thus doubtful that elevated C02 has a direct
subsequent increase in ICP. Weiner has proposed that . . .
. . . . . . contributory effect to the m1crograv1ty ocular syndrome.
shifting of the lungs in a cephalad direction could raise . .
. . . The body reacts to chronically elevated C02 by increas—
the pulmonary ap1ces to a posmon favorable for compres— . . . . .
. . . . . . mg bicarbonate levels to maintain a normal ac1d base
Sion of the prox1mal Jugular against the clav1cle [30]. This . . . . . .
. . . . . . balance. The p0551ble contribution of this mild metabolic
could explain the Visible disten51on of the external Jugular . . . . .
. . . . . compensatory all<a1051s 1S not known, but given that it IS a
veins seen in weightlessness in spite of lower central . . . . .
. . umque phys1olog1c c1rcumstance of space env1ronments,
venous pressure. The resulting cerebral venous sta51s may this should be considered
contribute to diminished CSF absorption, either globally '
or locally around the SAS surrounding the optic sheath, as . . .
. . . . 4.4.5. Reszstlve exerCISe
well as contributing to chor01d expan51on. . .
. . . , In order to mitigate the loss of bone and muscle that
It IS also p0551ble that a subjects natural anatomy . . .
. . . . occurs in weightlessness, crewmembers of long—duration
could predispose them to a higher increase in ICP for a . . . .
. . . . missmns typically spend an hour and a half daily per—
given change in 1ntracran1al volume. In 1985, Ross [31] . . . . .
. forming re51st1ve exerc1se. Implementation of the
accounted for the random nature of cerebral mountain . . . . .
. . . . . . Advanced Re51st1ve Exerc1se Dev1ce (ARED) into the astro—
51cl<ness by suggesting that 1nd1v1duals w1th smaller , . . . .
. . . nauts exerc1se routine in 2008 has led some to believe
ventricles and cerebrospinal ﬂuid spaces have a greater . . . . . . .
. . . . . . that heavy weight lifting is partially respon51ble for Visual
increase in ICP for a given increase in volume in one of the . . . .
. . . . impairment on—orb1t. The ARED prov1des loads up to the
three 1ntracran1al components, reﬂecting an anatomical .
. . . . . . . equivalent of 6001bs and allows crewmembers to per—
predisposmon to 1ntracran1al hyperten51on [31,32]. It is . . .
. . form such exerc1ses as dead lifts, squats, and heel raises
therefore p0551ble that naturally smaller CSF spaces in . .
. (This load value may seem exaggerated until one con—
some astronauts could make them more susceptible to . . .
sustained IIH causing visual disturbances Siders that terrestrial exerc1ses such as squats and heel
’ ' raises involve lifting the body weight, which is absent
in weightlessness.). Heavy exertions are associated
4.4.4. Increased levels of carbon dioxide with transient increases in mean arterial pressure and
The removal of metabolically produced carbon dioxide intrathoracic pressure, especially when performed against
(C02) from a spacecraft environment is an active process a closed glottis as in a Valsalva maneuver as commonly
involving ventilation and sequestering onto an adsorbent performed by weightlifters.
bed. The subsequent regeneration of the sorbent bed Exercise is generally associated with decreases in IOP,
requires heating and release of the C02 overboard, or in and this includes resistive training episodes which are
advanced systems, recycling to reclaim the oxygen. This associated with acute decreases following repetitions of
processing chain requires power and resources, and chest press and leg press sets [36]. IOP begins to return to
spacecraft typically run a much higher concentration the baseline value within minutes of cessation of exercise.
of C02 (approximately 0.5%) than nominal atmospheric A study by Dickerman et al. [37] of dynamic ocular
levels (0.039%) [33]. Generally, the on—board life support pressures in power athletes revealed signiﬁcant increases
systems maintain the C02 level below a symptomatic in IOP during maximal isometric contractions, with the
threshold. C02 levels were at normal operating levels presence of conjunctival hemorrhages, supporting IOP
(<5mmHg) for all missions of the presented cases. increases as a reﬂection of increased retinal venous
However the allowable limits are close enough to this pressure [37]. Vieira et al. [38] demonstrated an acute
threshold that individual sensitivities or regional ventila— rise in IOP during exertion, using electronic tonometry
tion anomalies not infrequently lead to subjective symp— while subjects performed chest presses [38], with 2 of 30
toms of C02 increase, such as headache [34]. It is also subjects showing a 10 mmHg transient increase. This

"
"9","K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87 85
population consisted of health club participants, so may 4.5. A new aspect of spaceﬂight adaptation
be representative of the regularly exercising astronaut
population, though averaging 20 years younger. Whatever the mechanism, microgravity ocular syn—
These studies suggest that resistive exercise induces drome occurs against the known backdrop of physiologic
highly dynamic changes in IOP, the long term effects of adaptation to microgravity. Weightlessness is the domi—
which are not fully understood. As there is no deﬁnitive nant factor affecting the human body during spaceﬂight,
research showinga similar ocular syndrome in the weight and adaptive changes toward new set points help the
lifting population to the one described in astronauts, this body to function more efﬁciently in this new environ—
factor would have to compound uniquely with other ment. There is a fairly comprehensive understanding of
physiologic processes and conditions of weightlessness. the overall physiologic response, both acute and long
Of note, four out of the 11 cases of visual impairment term. Fig. 5 graphically depicts the physiologic responses
described in this series occurred before the ARED was of major systems over time, showing that each system
ﬂown. A previous exercise device was available but differs in manifesting clinicalperceptions or impairment.
capable of less than half of the loading. Some of the more prominent physiological effects of
microgravity, such as space motion sickness, appear
4.4.6. High sodium diet almost immediately. As is seen, these adaptation pro—
Another contributing factor may be the high levels of cesses generally stabilize and remain below the clinical
sodium intake on—orbit. The direct correlation between threshold once a period of adaptation is completed.
sodium intake and blood pressure is fairly well estab— Most adaptive changes seem beneﬁcial, and adaptation
lished, although the overall role of dietary sodium in to weightlessness appears to be optimized after a period
cardiovascular events and outcomes has been less certain of about 4—6 weeks. In general, people are able to live and
[39]. Space food has historically been high in sodium, work effectively in space, performing cognitive tasks, ﬁne
largely due to the preservation requirements for onboard motor activities and heavy physical exertions. Some
shelf life and use. The US. recommended daily sodium changes only become maladaptive upon return to Earth,
intake is 2300 mg/day, whereas astronauts on the ISS notably musculoskeletal degradation (leading to weakness,
consume about 5000 mg/day of sodium, with some crew— fracture risk), cardiovascular deconditioning and decreased
members exceeding 10,000 mg/day. How this may contri— vascular volume (giving rise to postﬂight orthostatic hypo—
bute to the space ocular syndrome is not clear; however tension), and sensorineural adaptation (readaptation sick—
studies have shown that low sodium diets along with ness). A small subset of the human body’s response to
weight—reduction have actually reversed vision loss in weightlessness has a maladaptive Character during ﬂight.
patients with IIH [40,41]. Clinical management of IIH This includes neurovestibular response causing early space
typically involves restriction of dietary sodium and weight motion sickness and possible perception abnormalities,
loss diets. It should be stressed again that the IIH and cephalad ﬂuid shift causing head stufﬁness and headaches,
astronaut populations differ considerably, the former con— and calcium spilling from bone resorption, increasing the risk
sisting largely of overweight females. However it would of kidney stones. However, symptoms of neurovestibular
seem prudent to make efforts to reduce onboard dietary adaptation and ﬂuid shift generally resolve after a few days,
sodium Closer to a terrestrial daily recommendation, and and only one case of inﬂight kidney stones has been seen in
this is in fact underway at the Johnson Space Center. 50 years of human space ﬂight [42].
NeurovestibularS stem
Fluids and Electrol tes
CardiovascularS stem ViSiO""
Clinical
Horizon —~~- ~—‘————— w—~—r~~~---n—-—~~—~
/ ‘ Red Blood Cell Mass
3: /. Lean Bod Mass
Point -‘ #‘m
‘—
1-g /’ Bone and Calcium Radiation HV—
Set Metabolism __ M __ .. — — — — ""’ "" ‘-
Point 7
Time Scale (Months) 1 A 3 4 5 6
Point of Adaptation
Fig. 5. Physiologic changes of various systems during adaptation to microgravity.
Source: NASA.

"
"10","86 K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87

The newly recognized syndrome of decreased visual direct assessment of ICP pre— and post—ﬂight would be
acuity, elevated ICP, and ophthalmic Changes represents a very useful in elucidating the mechanism. However, direct
maladaptive aspect of spaceﬂight, and reminds the space assessment is currently obtained by lumbar puncture, a
medical community of the possibilities of further entities yet procedure not without complications and discomfort.
to be characterized. The newly added curve to Fig. 5 shows With a non—impaired and fully functional population,
this syndrome breaching the clinical horizon, becoming the indication for lumbar puncture becomes less Clinical
symptomatic in the form of visual acuity shift at the 6 week and more investigative. Undoubtedly, more measure—
mark, which current observations suggest as a reasonable ments will be obtained, but an obvious need is for
average for time of onset. Although it is tempting to speculate a reliable method of noninvasive measurement of ICP
on subclinical curves for ICP increase, optic nerve distension that can be validated and utilized both for ground and
and eye changes, these must await further inﬂight investiga— inﬂight studies. This is being actively pursued in the space
tion to characterize time course and degree. However, it is medical community.
reasonable to assume that the microgravity ocular syndrome Mitigation strategies will involve at a minimum
represents a common adaptive process involving cerebral inﬂight availability of corrective lenses to accommodate
vascular and CSF circulation heretofore unrecognized. Fully hyperopic shifts, and this is currently standard on the ISS.
characterizing this syndrome may further our basic physio— It is possible that pharmaceutical agents may play a
logic understanding of CSF circulation, unmasking more therapeutic role. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acet—
subtle effects which are otherwise dominated by gravita— azolamide is known to decrease CSF production as well as
tional inﬂuences. IOP, and has long been used in the treatment of IIH. It is

being considered for use in the microgravity ocular
5. Implications and further study syndrome, but may have drawbacks. IOP is not known
to increase during long—duration spaceﬂight and may

Vision changes associated with microgravity ocular actually be decreased. A further selective reduction may
syndrome can persist long after return to Earth, if not induce a relative hypotonic condition exacerbating defor—
permanently. It is important to emphasize once again that mation of the orbit if CSF pressure remains unchanged or
the visual acuity shift remains the only symptomatic high. In addition, there is evidence that acetazolamide
aspect recognized thus far. Although changes in vision may increase the risk of nephrolithiasis [43]. Thus, in the
could affect the ability of astronauts to perform mission spaceﬂight population, acetazolamide must be used with
critical tasks, the acuity shift is remediated with correc— caution.
tive lenses, and subjects remain fully functional. Some Finally, although the relative contributions of the
long—duration crewmembers with this syndrome have factors previously described have yet to be determined,
subsequently ﬂown short—duration ﬂights with no further each may have a corrective component in mitigating the
progression of acuity shift or anatomical changes. How— microgravity ocular syndrome. C02 levels may be
ever, the implications of this syndrome on long term decreased using more efﬁcient life support systems and
health are yet to be elucidated, and participation in lower sodium inﬂight diets will be ﬁelded in the near
further long—duration ﬂight remains an open question. future. Exercise countermeasures might be adjusted to
As such, it is critical to fully characterize this syndrome in avoid high transient ICP peaks. Methods to diminish the
support of crew health and identify its causative mechan— effects of cephalad ﬂuid shifts, such as thigh cuffs [27] and
isms as soon as possible. This should include preﬂight lower body negative pressure, may be considered for
identiﬁcation of individuals at particular risk and devel— prevention or treatment. The most elegant mitigation
oping mitigation strategies. for the cephalad ﬂuid shift of weightlessness would of

Medical examinations targeted toward these ocular course be artiﬁcial gravity.
changes must be implemented for the spaceﬂight popula—
tion, regardless of ophthalmic health, both pre— and post— 6. Conclusion
ﬂight. These should include visual acuity tests, high
resolution retinal imagery, visual ﬁeld assessment, and A newly recognized syndrome of visual impairment,
detailed imagery of intracranial ophthalmic structures. ophthalmic anatomical changes and increased intracra—
This will establish a detailed, normative baseline of all nial pressure associated with long—duration spaceﬂight
structures involved in this phenomenon for comparison has been identiﬁed. This syndrome seems to be weighted
and determination of incidence and severity. Inﬂight toward males, in which it occurs with an incidence
studies should include as a minimum serial assessment approaching 50%. Visual acuity changes, in particular
of visual acuity, IOP and retinal imagery. In addition to hyperopic shifts, remain the only symptom with the
direct camera assessment of the retinal surface, NASA is exception of one crewmember with a transient scotoma,
currently developing an in—ﬂight OCT capability that and crewmembers remain fully functional with corrective
could provide early recognition of microgravity—induced lenses. The human spaceﬂight community should be
eye and optic nerve changes. Inﬂight diagnostic ultra— aware of this phenomenon and its implications, and
sound can show intraorbital changes such as globe ﬂat— vigorous efforts must be made to determine causative
tening and optic nerve sheath distension over time. mechanisms and mitigation strategies.

Akey component of the microgravity ocular syndrome It is likely that the microgravity ocular syndrome
may be elevated ICP, and this has been measured in only originates from unrecognized physiologic processes
four subjects, in the post—ﬂight period. Arguably, routine involved in adaptation to weightlessness. Clariﬁcation of

"
"11","K. Marshall-Bowmcm et al. / Acta Astronautica 87 (2013) 77—87 87
these processes Will aid in understanding the overall [20] T. Moore, W. Thornton, Space shuttle inﬂight and postﬂight ﬂuid
human response to spaceﬂight, and will direct near— 221?; $635132: $34231 V2316“ Changes, AViat- Space EnViron- MEd-

. . . . . t _ _
Perm 1nve6t1gat10ns 0n the 155' AS long—duratldn .ﬂlght [21] CS. Leach, C.P. Alfrey, W.N. Suki, Regulation of body ﬂuid compart—
tlme contlnues t0 accumUIate and more SOPhIStlcatEd ments during short—term spaceﬂight,]. Appl. Physiol. 81 (1) (1996)
diagnostic tools become available, the discovery of addi— 105—116.
tional phenomena relevant to human adaptation are [22] C. Alfrey, M. Udden, C. Leach—.Huntoon,.T. Driscoll, M. Pickett,
. . Control of red blood cell mass 1n spaceﬂ1ght,]. Appl. Phy5101. 81
ant1c1pated. (1) (1996) 98_104_
[23] J. Buckey, F. Gaffney, L. Lane, B. Levine, D. Watenpaugh, S. Wright,
References C. Yancy Jr., D. Meyer, C. Blomqvist, Central venous pressure in
space, J. Appl. Physiol. 81 (1996) 19—25.
[24] R. Videback, P. Norsk, Atrial distension in humans during micro—

[1] TH. Mader, CR. Gibson, A.F. Pass, LA. Kramer, AG. Lee, J. Fogarty, gravity induced by parabolic ﬂights, ]. Appl. Physiol. 83 (1997)
W.]. Tarver, ].P. Dervay, D.R. Hamilton, A. Sargsyan, ].L. Phillips, 1862—1866.

13- Tran, W- Lipsky, J- ChOi, C- Stern, R- I(uyumjian, J-D- P0119 Optic [25] M. Estenne, M. Gorini, A. Van Muylem, V. Ninane, M. Paiva, Rib cage
disc edema, globe ﬂattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts shape and motion in microgravity, J_ Appl. Physiol. 73 (3) (1992)
observed in astronauts after long—duration space ﬂight, Ophthal— 946—954.

mology 118 (2011) 2058—2069 . [26] W. Thornton, G. Hofﬂer, J. Rummel, Anthropometric changes and

[2] LA. Kramer, A.E. Sargsyan, I(.M. Hasan, ].D. Polk, D.R. Hamilton, ﬂuid shifts, in: Biomedical Results of Skylab, NASA, Washington,
Orbital and intracranial effects of microgravity: ﬁndings at 3—T MR DC, 1977’ pp. 330—338.

Imaging, Rediology 263 (3) (2012) 819—827' (EPUb 2012 Mar B.)- [27] S. Herault, G. Fomina, I. Alferova, A. Kotovskaya, V. Poliakov,

[3] V""1 Myasnikov, S'I' Stepanova, Features Of cerebral hemodynamics P. Arbeille, Cardiac, arterial and venous adaptation to weightless—
1n cesmonauts before and after ﬂlght on the MIR orbital $?at10n’,ln: ness during 6—month MIR spaceﬂights with and without thigh cuffs
Orbital Station MIR, Space Biology and Med1c1ne, vol. 2, Biomedical .

. . . . . (bracelets), Eur. J. Appl. Phy5101. 81 (5) (2000) 384—390.
Experiments, Institute of Biomedical Problems of the Ru551an [28] K Iwasaki B Levine R Zhang J Zuckerman J Pawelczyk
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 2008, pp. 300—304. ' . . ’ ' ’ ' ’ ' . ’ ' ’

[4] SR. Zwart, CR. Gibson, T.H. Mader, K. Ericson, R. Ploutz—Snyder, A' DIEdHCh’ A' Ertl, 1' COX’ W' Cooke, C' Giller, C' Ray, .L' Li“?
M. Heer, S.M. Smith,Vision changes after spaceﬂight are related to H“ BUCkW' F“ BalSCh’ 13' Eckberg, 13' Robertson, 1' Biaggioni,
alterations in Folate— and Vitamin B—12—dependent one—carbon CﬁBlomqwfslt, ﬁu?;ﬁ Cérfbgélgillittogﬁlzlgggﬁggfogrfb during, and
metabolism, . Nutr. 142 3 2012 427—431. E ub 2012 Feb 1 . 3 er 513?“ 1g 1 - 3’519- ‘ - ,

[5] G. Gray, S. Jjohnston, 1\(/Ie)dEcal E)valuations (aid Standards, )in: [29] R.]. White, C..G Blomdv1st, Central venous pressure and cardiac
M.R. Barratt, S.L. Pool (Eds.), Principles of Clinical Medicine for function during spaceﬂ1ght,]:Appl. Phy51ol. 8.5 (2)(1998)738‘746'
Space Flight, Springer, New York, 2008. [30] TL Wiener, Space obstructive syndrome: intracranial hyperten—

[6] SQ. Duntley, R.W. Austin, ].H. Taylor, ].L. Harris, Experiment S—8/D— Sion, intraocular pressure, and papilledema 1n space, Av1at. Space
13, Visual Acuity and Astronaut Visibility, in: Proceedings of the Environ. MEd- 83 (2012) 64—66-

Gemini Midprogram Conference Including Experiment Results, [31] RT. R053, The random nature of cerebral mountain sickness, Lancet
NASA, Washington, DC, 1966. 1 1985 990-991-

[7] W.R. Hawkins,].F. Zieglschmid, Clinical aspects of crew health, in: [32] M-H- Wilson, J- Milledge, Direct measurement 0f intracranial
R.S. Johnston, L.F. Dietlein, C.A. Berry (Eds.), Biomedical Results of pressure at high altitude and correlation 0f ventricular size With
Apollo, US Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1975, acute mountain sickness: Brian Cummins’ results from the 1985
pp. 43—81. NASA SP—368. I(ishtwar expedition, Neurosurgery 63 (2008) 970—975.

[8] W.H. Paloski, C.M. Oman, ].]. Bloomberg, M.F. Reschke, 5.]. Wood, [33] ].T. James, The headache of carbon dioxide exposures, Society of
D.L. Harm, B.T. Peters, A.P. Mulavara, ].P. Locke, L.S. Stone, Risk of Automotive Engineers, Paper no. 07ICES—42, 2007.
sensory—motor performance failures affecting vehicle control dur— [34] J. Law, S. Watkins, D. Alexander, In—ﬂight Carbon Dioxide Exposures
ing space missions: a review of the evidence, J. Gravitational and Related Symptoms: Association, Susceptibility, and Opera—
Physiol. 15 (2)(2008). tional Implications, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX,

[9] S. Griebel, G. Kosmorsky, Choroidal folds associated with increased 2010 June.
intracranial PFESSUFE, Am]. Ophthalmol. 129 (4) (2000) 513-515- [35] U. Sliwka, J. Krasney, S. Simon, P. Schmidt, J. Noth, Effects of

[10] J-J- COFbEtt, M-P- Mehta, Cerebrospinal ﬂUid pressure in normal sustained low—level elevations of carbon dioxide on cerebral blood
obese SUbJECtS and patients With psedotumor cerebri, Neurology 33 ﬂow and autoregulation of the intracerebral arteries in humans,
(10) (1983) 1386-.1388- . . . . Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69 (3) (1998) 299—306.

[11] M- Johnston, The 1n1portanee 0f lymphatics 1n cerebtospinal ﬂuid [36] J. Chromiak, B. Abadie, R. Braswell, Y. I(oh, D. Chilek, Resistance
transpott, Lymphatic Res.“ 3101' 1 (1) [2003) 41—44 discu551on 45' training exercises acutely reduce intraocular pressure in physically

[12] B. Morki, The Monro—Kellie hypothe51s: applications 1n CSF volume active men and women, J. Strength Cond. Res. 17 (4) (2003)
depletion, Neurology 56 (2001) 1746—1748. 715_720_

[13] C'L' Gw1nnutt, B“ 5aha, Cerebrai bIOOd ﬂow 6nd intracranial [37] R. Dickerman, G. Smith, L. Langham—Roof, W. McConathy, J. East,
$225112? Anaesthe51a and Inten51ve Care Med1c1ne 6 (5) (2005) A. Smith, Intra—ocular pressure changes during maximal isometric

[14] K Digre-J Corbett I diopathic intracranial hypertension (pseu do— contraction: does this reﬂect intra—cranial pressure or retinal

' ’ ' . _ ’ . . venous pressure? Neurol. Res. 21 (3) (1999) 243—246.
tumor cerebri). a reappraisal, Neurologist 7 (2001) 2_67' [38] G Vieira H Oliveira D de Andrade M Bottaro R Ritch Intraocular

[15] D. Oreskovic, M. Klarica, The formation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid: ' ’ ' . . ’ '. . ’. '. ’ ' ’
nearly a hundred years of interpretations and misinterpretations, F2ggs6u)r$2\5:rléllt2122 during WElght lifting, Arch. Ophthalmol. 124

[16] 3131;215:133; Eééigﬁdﬂoﬂf)gfguti,62hl. Hunter, G. Taylor, J. Charles, [39] M. Alderman, Evidence relating dietary sodium to Cardiovascular
R. Meehan, Intraocular pressure and retinal vascular changes D15ease,].Am. COH' NUU' 2.5 (3)(2906)2565‘2615'
during transient exposure to microgravity, Am. J. Ophthalmol. [40] I. Bekevac, S. Goel,.Trans.1ent, .unilaterail, complete, oculomdtor
115 (3) (1993) 347_350_ galsy in. an 36d2111t) [(3251511eln)t:1/\:11t261d10path1c intracranial hyperten51on,

[17] T. Mader, G. Taylor, N. Hunter, M. Caputo, R. Meehan, Intraocular igna Vitae — -
pressure, retinal vascular, and visual acuity changes during 48 h of [41] 3- Newborg, Pseudotumor CEFEbFi treated by rice FEdUCtiOU diet,
10 degrees head—down tilt, Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 61 (1990) Arch. Intern. MEd- 133 (1974) 802-807-

810—813. [42] V. Lebedev, Diary ofa Cosmonaut: 21 1 days in Space, Nauka I Zhizn,

[18] S. Dhungana, B. Sharrack, N. Woodroffe, Idiopathic intracranial MOSCOW. 1983- [English translation C1988 by the G-L-O-S-S- CO.;
hypertension, Acta Neurol. Scand. 121 (2010) 71—82. NEW York, NYE Bantam BOOkS; I990-]-

[19] M. Guzowski, J. Wang, M. Rochtchina, K. Rose, P. Mitchell, Five—year [43] R. TaWil, R. Moxley, R. Griggs, Acetazolamide—induced nephrolithia—
refractive changes in an older population: The Blue Mountains Eye sis. Implications for treatment of neuromuscular disorders, Neurology
Study, Ophthalmology 110 (7) (2003) 1364—1370. 43 (6) (1993) 1105.

"
