"","x"
"1","PROSPECTIVE OBSERVATIONAL STUDY OF OCULAR HEALTH IN 188 CREWS — THE OCULAR
HEALTH STUDY

C. Ottol, Y. Barrz, S. P1atts3, R.P10utz-Snyder1, A. Sargsyan4, D. A1exander3, R. Riascoss, C. Gibs0n6, N. Patel7

1Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX; 2University Of Texas Medical Branch; 3NASA J ohnson

Space Center, Houston, TX; 4Wyle Science, Technology & Engineering Group, Houston, TX; 5 The University of

Texas Health Science Center at Houston, TX;6C0asta1 Eye Associates, Webster, TX; 7The University Of Houston,

Houston, TX.

INTRODUCTION
The Visual Impairment Intraeranial Pressure (VIIP) syndrome is currently NASA’s number one human space ﬂight
risk. The syndrome, Which is related to microgravity exposure, manifests With Changes in Visual acuity (hyperopie
shifts, seotomas), Changes in eye structure (Optic disc edema, choroidal folds, cotton wool spots, globe ﬂattening,
and dilated optic nerve sheaths), and in some cases With documented increased intracranial pressure (ICP) postﬂight.
While the eye appears to be the main affected end organ of this syndrome, the ocular effects are thought to be
related to underlying Changes in the vascular system and the central nervous system. The leading hypotheses for the
development of VIIP involve microgravity-induced head-ward ﬂuid shifts along With a loss of gravity-assisted
drainage of venous blood from the brain, leading to cephalic congestion, decreased CSF resorption and increased
ICP. Since 70% of ISS crewmembers have manifested Clinical signs or symptoms of the VIIP syndrome, it is
assumed that the maj ority have some degree of ICP elevation in-ﬂight compared to the ground. Prolonged elevations
of ICP can cause long-term reduced Visual acuity and loss of peripheral Visual ﬁelds, and have been reported to
cause mild cognitive impairment in the analog terrestrial population of Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension (11H).
These potentially irreversible health consequences underscore the importance of identifying the factors that lead to
this syndrome and mitigating them.
METHODS
The Ocular Health study expands on the required in-ﬂight medical testing required of long-duration crewmembers
assigned to an International Space Station (188) mission, to include 13 sessions over a three-year period. Pre- and
postﬂight evaluations include functional eye exams (Visual testing), structural eye exams (fundoscopy, ocular
ultrasound, optical coherence tomography, optical biometry and biomieroscopy), intraocular pressure (IOP,
tonometry), cardiovascular compliance (Via ultrasound With concurrent ECG and blood pressure), noninvasive
intracranial pressure (Via pulsatility indeX, measured by transcranial Doppler), and Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) to assess brain anatomy. In-ﬂight evaluations include Visual testing, Optical coherence tomography,
fundoseopy, tonometry, cardiovascular compliance and transcranial Doppler.
RESULTS
Preﬂight, in-ﬂight and postﬂight data Will be presented for ﬁve Ocular Health subj eets. These data Will include:
Visual acuity, refraction, fundoscopy, OCT, ocular ultrasound, vascular compliance, TCD, IOP and MRI. One-year
postﬂight data Will be presented for two of these subj eets. Data indicates that vascular compliance, retro-orbital
pressure and IOP affect retinal nerve ﬁber layer swelling.
DISCUSSION
This prospective study aims to understand the etiology of the VIIP syndrome, establish preﬂight baseline
characteristics, deﬁne the temporal sequence for the appearance of signs and symptoms, Characterize the nature of
in-ﬂight Changes, document the postﬂight time course for recovery to baseline, and determine the impact of
prolonged Changes on crew health. Data from this study Will improve the understanding of VIIP incidence, signs,
symptoms, susceptibilities, timeline for development and recovery, and aid in guiding the development of
countermeasures and targeted treatments for preventing the VIIP syndrome and its complications.

"
