"","x"
"1","2009-01-2360
Providing Optimal Root-Zone Fluid Fluxes: Effects of Hysteresis on
Capillary-Dominated Water Distributions in Reduced Gravity
Robert Heinse
University of Idaho
Scott B. Jones
Utah State University
Markus Tuller
The University of Arizona
Gail E. Bingham
Space Dynamics Laboratory, Logan, UT
Igor Podolskiy
Institute for Biomedical Problems (IBMP), RAS, Moscow, Russia
Dani Or
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETHZ), Ziirich, Switzerland
Copyright © 2009 SAE International
ABSTRACT distribution relative to terrestrial observations in the
same porous media. Consequently, such altered fluid
Management of water, air and nutrients in coarse- distributions may reduce connectivity and increase
textured porous plant—growth substrates relies not only tortuosity 0f gaseous pathways sustaining diffusive 933
on the relative amounts of fluids but also on their transport compared to terrestrial conditions for similar
distribution within porous media. Integration of plants in air—filled'centents. SUCh changes in fluid pathways may
future life support systems for space exploration raises mdUCG limitations t9 e>l<change 0f respiratory 93393 tor
the question of how fluid distributions in porous plant- plant FOO’ES, and highlight a range 0f other potential
growth substrates are aItered under reduced Changes in microgravity behavior Of capillary dominated
gravitational conditions. Central to addressing this issue Pr909§393 important for distribution and transport 0f
is the behavior of the water retention characteristic flundsnn POFOUS media.
(WRC). WRC encapsulates fluid-porous medium
interactions and is key for control of water supply to INTRODUCTION
plants. The hysteretic nature of WRC implies non-
homogenous water distributions between its primary Providing balanced fluid fluxes of water, gases and
draining land wetting CUi'VGS. During dynamic drainage nutrients in microgravity (< 1- 10—3 960mm) is a complex
and WGttlng CyCleS,l ConSIderable water content gradlents process whose management is |arge|y controned by the
dGVGIOP at separations 0f only a few pore lengths. In the distribution of water in the porous-media root zone and
absence 0f a.gravity force, ”1.939 non-hemogeneons the arrangement of fluid supply sources. Unexpected
dIStrlbUtlonS give “39 t0 cons1derab|y different ﬂU'd heterogeneous fluid distributions are possible with the
The Engineering Meetings Board has approved this paper for publication. It has successfully completed SAE’s peer review process under the supervision of
the session organizer. This process requires a minimum of three (3) reviews by industry experts.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or othenNise, without the prior written permission of SAE.
ISSN 0148-7191
Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of SAE. The author is solely responsible for the content of
the paper.
SAE Customer Service: Tel: 877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 724-776-0790
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
SAE Web Address: htt9://www.sae.org
Printed in USA 5-15 Inter nationa

"
"2","shift to capillary-dominated water distributions asaresult availability (hypoxia) in plants has been found to be

of a reduction in gravitational force summarized in a symptomatic for these conditions as continuous gaseous

recent review paper by Or et al. (2009). Hysteresis in the pathways collapse (Bingham et al. 2002). For example,
water retention characteristic describes the range of Porterfield et al. (2000) and Stout et al. (2001) have
heterogeneity in the water distribution at a given matric reported hypoxia in a variety of plants grown in different
potential (i.e., managed suction set point for membrane space greenhouses. In these experiments, hypoxia
hydration systems), and its characteristics affect the appeared to have been a decisive factor despite similar
delivery and transport of essential plant resources to the sampIe-averaged air—filled contents. Direct
root. A proper description of the effects of hysteresis on measurements of oxygen concentrations in reduced
the water distribution in reduced gravity is therefore gravity conducted by Porterfield et al. (1997) even
essential. suggested signs of hypoxia in plants while the bulk

oxygen concentration in the agar growth medium was

Past plant research in microgravity has shown reduced elevated compared to 19 measurements. The difference

biomass production compared to plants grown under in plantvigor was attributed to impaired oxygen resupply

terrestrial conditions using equal experimental systems to the roots.

and management protocols. There is consensus that

plant physiological functions are not primarily limiting The supply of root resources is intimately tied to the

(Ivanova et al. 2005; Monje et al. 2005; Musgrave et al. distributions of fluid phases in porous-media root zones.

2000), but that changes in the microgravity behavior of The distributions determine the connectivity of the

fluids impede that protocols for successfully growing phases shaping the formation and characteristics of

plants on Earth provide the same optimal physical continuous pathways for mass transport. While
environment in reduced gravity. The discrepancy is continuous water—filled pores and films provide
mainly attributed to the significantly different distribution conductive pathways for the transport of water and
of water in microgravity (Ivanova et al. 2006; Steinberg nutrients, the diffusive transport of gases relies on
et al. 2005). Difficulties in providing uniform substrate continuous gas-filled pathways because the transport in
water contents in root zones and speculated resulting the liquid phase is practically impeded by the several
excessive irrigation have consequently plagued many orders of magnitude slower diffusivity of gases in water
plant growth experiments in space. Low oxygen compared to the gaseous phase. In order to provide
optimal (or least limiting) root zone fluxes, a balance
between water-filled and gas-filled pathways must be
EE_E... [31:34.” (‘13-:th ___f.._* achieved. This balance depends not only on the
4 11:55}qu [i‘lﬁl-fﬁlgﬁi 'Eggﬁi volumetric eontents of the respective. phases, but further
.. :i‘; quqﬁﬁ' on their distribution. The distribution of water then
1]_ .F:_-': '.-.|.:|:- 2:_.-..-- _-' _ll':.=--.--'-.-f'-4- critically regulates the path length of these continuous
5 ..- -: :'r-' '-I"". . . ..‘h-E' . .. - |._ pathways, where increasing path lengths (signified by
I. ....- I.._ 'I_- I.IIII.I _ 3 _. . . . .

.. .' I _ - .. ___ _—_. --.:-_-__ _; ..- 1:. ..-. E: Increased tortuosny) from a resource supply to a smk
4.. - ' I 4.. 'I::- -:-:-.-_-'. _ .4...|_ .JI'. . - _ (Le, a root) reduce the sustainable mass flux at a given
_ ' _ '_ ""_ ' "" “'ﬂ"" "" '_' concentration gradient. The challenge then is to
ﬂu. '9 ﬁr“ FL; 2.921,, maximize the inversely related processes of gas and
:ﬂﬂfﬁ #1:? I143; "" ﬂ liquid transport (Jones et al., 2005; Jones and Or, 1998).

”I. '53-. E I‘- .4; 4' . =5"" -‘_“

Ug'biﬁ'ﬁ': ?;EI-lrh —:::*__JE Few experiments have considered effects of water
44 r'.‘|'.!-I.':'.'_ a“. 4:.- _'_ Eﬁgﬂéﬁ m’qttilwﬁi’ II-[ili distributions on root-zone resources. Stutte et al. (2006;
“1?,"" '2' “.31???"" 25-. 3""” hmﬁhiﬁ 251$!an _:-.j-- 2005) used the Biomass Production System (BPS) for
44'”. ...'_;I Phi"" ﬁ- “41*"". ”‘%E}1 _j_: .1” the PESTO (Photosynthesis Experiment Systems

44 ' .4 4' 4 .4‘4. 4 “4444.4 Testing and Operations) ISS experiment and
(301f1<lerltl“at101f1grauiiemt—> successfully grew stress-free wheat canopies for 21-
days in microgravity. BPS was designed by Orbitec and

Figure 1 Two-dimensional terrestriaI-(lg) and zero-gravitv (0g) utilized a shallow root zone instrumented with a

verticalwiter distributions at different average air-filled contents( tensiometer_ The moisture set point was chosen using

5: qb — 6.). Lattice Boltzmann simulations of gaseous transport design concepts from Jones et al_ (2005) and moisture

illustrate the connectivity and tortuosity of connected gas-filled addition data appeared to have verified the predicted

pathways(vectors) needed for the diffusive transport of metabolic water distribution (Oscar Monje, Dynamac Corp.,
gases in variably saturated porous media. Non-conductive liquid personal communication).

and solid phases are lumped together in the solid squares. Open

squares ate gas f“'e°'_ and a""°‘” gasews diff“5‘°“_ _a!°""g t_he At hydrostatic equilibrium, the distribution of water in

concentration gradient If connected. 1g cases show artIfICIally high porous media can be estimated via the water retention

quantities of diffuswe pathways that tend to be less tortuous h teristic (WRC) describin the fundamental media-

because of the hydrostatic water-content distribution resulting in C arac . . ’ g . .

the generation of preferential pathways for horizontal diffusion. wate.r Irelatlonshlp. . on Earth’ a combinatlen Of

Simulations were conducted with a modified code after Haslam graVItat!Onal and .Caplllary forces (reughly comprlsmg the

(2005)_ hydraulic potential) produce vertically graded water

"
"3","distributions with vertically linearly decreasing dynamic processes, water—content distributions could
gravitational potentials. In reduced gravity, capillary then be established where different parts of the soil
forces are more dominant and potentially produce less profile may be wetting and draining along different
graded water—content distributions. In the currently scanning curves simultaneously. In reduced gravity, the
favored particulate plant—growth media of millimeter— dominance of capillary forces may then produce stable
sized particles, a rapid reduction in water content is and unexpected water—contentdistributions not observed
observed within a narrow range of hydraulic potentials on Earth.
(i.e., 0—20 omege) implying a sharp non-Iinear vertical
grading of water contents in terrestrial gravity (Steinberg Past studies have provided evidence of altered water
and Poritz, 2005). Figure 1 compares conceptualized behavior in porous media in microgravity, starting With
water distributions at three average water contents the seminal work by (Podolsky and Mashinsky, 1994),
between terrestrial- and zero-gravity. In this simplified who showed differences in water content distributions
model, a uniform distribution of water in zero-gravity is measured in ,qu aboard the MIR space station and
assumed. The impact of the different water—content measurements on Earth. Their observations pointed to
distributions on the establishment of continuous gas- enhanced capillarytransport and the promotion of phase
filled pathways needed for gaseous diffusion was entrapment in reduced gravity. Jones and Or (1999)
simulated for horizontal transport using a modified used a numerical model based on the Richards (1931)
Lattice Boltzmann code after Haslam (2006). The equation to simulate zero gravity conditions and
different distributions of the liquid phase resulted in very concluded that narrower pore size distributions and
different gas-transport pathways illustrated by the spatial reduced participation of larger pore sizes to water
distribution of red arrows. One may then hypothesize retention Characteristics attributed to differences in
that at zero gravity, a shift in gas-percolation threshold to experimental measurements from the space station MIR
lower water contents, reduced connectivity and an and the space shuttle to measurements conducted on
increased tortuosity compared to terrestrial conditions Earth. Combined, these unexpected water distributions
results. Recently, Chau et al. (2005) estimated the are projected to impact not only fluxes of water through
impact of such alterations in water distributions on the creation of altered continuous water—filled pore
diffusive mass transport using Lattice Boltzmann patterns, but also fluxes of gases that rely on continuous
simulations. The authors predicted that relative diffusion air—filled pore patterns.
coefficients may be reduced by up to 25 percent in zero
gravity. Our aim was to (1) frame water—content distributions in
different gravity regimes and related hydraulic properties
In the above simulations, the WRC was assumed to be in an effort to provide balanced fluxes of water, gases
non-hysteretic. With this simplification, a uniform matric and nutrients, and (2) estimate the impact of altered
potential observed in zero gravity would result in a porous-media water distributions on mass fluxes of
uniform water—content distribution. In actuality, the WRC essential root resources
is hysteretic, meaning a different primary characteristic
describes the wetting (imbibition) and draining (drying) MATERIALS
sequences. In addition, wetting and draining processes
may also traverse secondary Characteristics in-between The porous media under consideration are ceramic
the primary characteristics. Recent work by Heinse et aggregate media commercially available from Profile
al. (2007) suggested that the significant impact 0t Products, Buffalo Grove, IL sieved to particle size
reduced gravity is not 0“ the water retention fractions of 025-1 mm (Profile), 1-2 mm (Turface) and a
characteristic per se, but on the distribution of water in mixture (50:50 by weight) of the two (Mix). These media
POVOUS media. The authors used variable gravity testing have been widely used in microgravity plant experiments
during parabolic flight and concluded that the hysteretic (Levine 2003; Steinberg and Henninger 1997; Stutte et
nature of the soil water characteristic (SWC) determined al. 2005) and are expected to be used in future |ife
the heterogeneous distribution Of water based on the support applications_ The aggregates are stable, have
local history 0t wetting and draining processes. With moderate surface area for nutrient storage and exhibit
Table 1 Porous media water retention parameters for the van Genuchten (1980) model from Heinse et al. (2007) and saturated hydraulic
conductivities after (Heinse et al. 2005).
Draining Wetting

Porous medium (size) a n Br (95 a n Br (95 K5

cm’l cm3 cm‘3 cm3 cm’3 cm’l cm3 cm’3 cm3 cm‘3 cm s—1
Turface(1--2 mm) 0.185 5.57 0.34 0.73 0.320 4.06 0.34 0.68 1-1
Mix(0.25--2 mm) 0.112 3.90 0.34 0.72 0.167 2.92 0.34 0.64 “OtmeaSUFEd
Profile(0.25--1mm) 0.099 7.69 0.34 0.72 0.187 4.41 0.34 0.69 0-2

"
"4","two distinct pore spaces, inter—aggregate and intra- 52M S(z,t)
- _ - — + — = 0 (5)
aggregate pores. Only the Inter aggregate pore retention 3302 D
Characteristics, particularly in the optimal range for liquid
and gas SUpply 0f 0 t0 -25 cmHQO (1 cmHQO = 97-96 Pa) van Bavel (1951) presented a solution for Eq. (5)
matric potential, are of interest for this study. considering a constant and uniform source/sink in a
porous media underlain by an impervious boundary at
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS depth L (e.g., a water table for gaseous fluxes or an air-
interface for liquid fluxes) and an ambient content ,uo at
The water content 91) and the gas content 6a in porous the surface. The solution for the content distribution
media are intricately linked and may be described in under these limiting boundary conditions in the porous-
terms of their volumes in porous media: media profile is:
V V + V — V S 3:2
: _’LU : —’LU CL CL : — Z — — — 6
a VI VII n 6a (1) m) H0+D(L$ 2) H
where Vw is the volume of water, Va the gas-filled The prediction of content distributions as a function of
volume and W the total porous media volume. 72 is the path length for steady-state conditions using ECI- (6)
. . Vw +Va provides a framework for estimating fluxes from the
porous-media porosnty (71 = T) source boundary to the plant root. However, the
t assumed constant diffusivity in Eq. (6) is not an accurate
description of diffusivity profiles that are determined by
MACROSCOPIC POROUS—MEDIA cententIprofIIes as well as source and Ismk rates and
distributions. One may then revert to usmg an effective
CHARACTERIZATION . . . . . .
diffuswity Integrating over the domain between source
Fluxes in Porous-Media RootZones anId . pIomt-of-Interest, d'Y'dmg the 90m?“ Into
InfiniteSImal small layers With constant diffuswlty. The
. . effective diffusivity for such a layered non-uniform
The transport of plant resources In porous media . . . . .
. . . porous-medla profile With IIqUId and gaseous fluxes
Including water and nutrients as well as gases can be . . .
. . perpendicular to the layering can be estimated based on
castln generalterms usmgtransporttheory. . . . . . . . ..
harmonic averaging of IndIVIduaI diffuswltles of each
Considering a one-dimensional root zone, one may layer: I
supplement the differential form of the mass balance 2 Az-
equation with a sink/source term describing uptake and I21 Z
release of resources by plant roots: Deff = ﬁ (7)
Zz‘
3,11 avz Z Dig”)
_ : _ _ Z It 1:1

375 32 8 (Z ) (2)

I I I where Deg is the effective diffusivity for the entire
where M 'S the Icontent Of the resource, instheIphySIcal domain. DAM) represents the diffusivity of discrete
separation, ’Uz IS the flux denSIty and .32 IS a dlStrlbtJted layers 7; of thickness Azz- and content M, and I is the
smIk/s0LIJrCIe rate. The planar flux denSIty can be defined total number of layers within the domain.
usmg FICkS first law:

3 Analytical Descriptions and Parameterizations of
_ M D'ff ' 't'
Z _ —D— 3 | usnvn Ies
v 32 ( )

I I I I I I Liquid Fluxes - For liquid fluxes in porous media, Eq. (3)
yvhere D IS the dlfoSlVlty. Combining (2) and (3) FGSUItS iS identified as the Buckingham-Darcy law in the
”‘3 absence of gravity and Eq. (4) is identified as the

Richards (1931) equation where the (always positive)
a_ﬂ‘ _ 2 _ a_ﬂ‘ _ porous-media liquid diffusivity for unsaturated conditions
_ D Sz(z,t) (4) . .
8t 62: 62: IS given as:
Eq. (4) can be used to predict the performance of the 1 8h
root zone. While notoriously hard to solve, solutions exist D8 : K@ (8)
for specific conditions and parameterizations discussed
below. where K denotes the hydraulic conductivity, h the matric
I I I potential describing the surface interactions between
For steady-state d'foS'On (8p/8t 2.0) and assuming a water and porous-media solids, and (9 is the volumetric
constant d'foS'V'ty’ Eq. (4) can be written 333 water content. 8h/86 is the inverse of the slope of the

"
"5","soil water characteristic curve 6(h) describing the _ dcg
. . . . . . . vZ——Da— (12)
phySIcaI enVIronment conSIstIng of volumes of aIr, IIqUId dzc
and solids in terms of the energy status of water in the
media as a functional relationship between water content where Da, is the diffusion coefficient in free air, and (:9 is
and matric potential. Several parameterizations 0f the the gas concentration. The apparent diffusion coefficient
soil water characteristic and the unsaturated hydraulic D9 in a porous medium is lower than in air due to limited
conductivity are. known. In order to enable a compact and tortuous pathways in the presence of water filled
formulation we Introduce the normalized water content pores and solid particles. Moldrup et al. (2000) derived
(|.e. saturation Index): an expression for the apparent gas diffusion coefficient
D9 as a function of air—filled pore space in sieved and
9 : % (9) repacked porous media given as:
where (98 is the saturated volumetric water content and 96
(97. is the residual volumetric water content, respectively. D9 : Daeaf (13)
The soil water characteristic curve may then be
parameterized using the van Genuchten (1980) where n is the porosity and (9a is the gas-filled content of
relationship: the medium. A fitting exponent 6 : 1.5 was found to be
m a good approximation for most unstructured media by
= [4] 1o Moldrup et al. (2000) and confirmed for ceramic
em) ( )
1 + (04%)” aggregates by Jones et al. (2003).
where 04, m and n are empirical parameters. WATER-CONTENT DISTRIBUTIONS IN
The unsaturated hydraulic conductivity as a function of PLANETARY- AND ZERO- GRAVITY
water content in connection with the statistical pore-size
d'Str'bUt'On. model Of Muglem (1976) .may then be The previous relationships relating fluxes of water and
expressed In terms of matrlc potential usmg parameters gases to plant roots as a function of media parameters
used m Eq. (10): can be used to characterize a porous medium. The
2 intricate dependency of these fluxes on the liquid
[(1 — (aihi)”—1) [1 + (aihi)”]m)] distribution requires different solutions for varying gravity
K(h) :KSW (11) regimes, where gravity and hysteresis determine the
spatial and temporal distribution of water. Additional
Frequently the simplification m = 1 _ 1/” is used. eonsicierations conlcern the water supply strategies
Including the location and operation of sources and
Both the water retention characteristic and the smks.
unsaturated hydraulic conductivity function are CHANGES IN THE VERTICAL DISTRIBUTION
hysteretic, meaning that a set of parameters describing
the primary, process dependent (|.e. draining and The capillary rise equation can be used to predict the
wetting) functions are needed for the Closure of the |' 'd d' t'b t' b d th h . ht f . h
model. Terrestrial (1g) porous-media water retention Iqu' , IS n u Ion , ase on 'e eng 0 “$9 as a
Characteristics for Profile, Turface and Mix have been function Of the radius Of a 030””)! tube T Wh'Ch can be
parameterized by Steinberg and Poritz (2005) and by related to the porous-media pore snze:
Heinse et al. (2007) and are given in Table 1 along with
saturated hydraulic conductivities. h = M (14)
,0ng
Gaseous Fluxes - In porous media, diffusion is the
dominant transport process for gaseous fluxes because where 0 is the surface tension 0t “CiUid, ”Y is the contact
of a lack of significant air—pressure gradients (Collin and angle Of the solid-quuid interface, Pw iS the density 0t
Rasmuson 1988). The driving force for this diffusive liquid and g is the gravitational acceleration. When
transport is a gas concentration or partial pressure exposing water in porous media to Earth (19), Martian
gradient. Such gradients develop around plant roots as (0.389), Lunar (0.1659) or zero-gravity (09), the capillary
02 is being consumed for respiration and C02 and other rise scales with the reciprocal gravitational force
metabolic gases are released. according to Eq. (14). One can then use the
parameterized soil water characteristic (Eq. (10)) to
The effective gas diffusion flux density vz in air may be predict the steady-state distribution of water for given
written according to Eq. (3) as: boundary conditions.

"
"6","1C!
9 (a) ([1)
L 1e; U};
8
T . .
draining
? a 1/
i
E 5
.113
E 4
3
2
1
'3
0.4 0.6 DH {14 0.6 0.3 [1.4 0.5 0.8 {3.4 ELIE ELE-
Vﬂlumetric Wrater Cantent [C1113 CIHTH']
Figure 2 Hypothetical hydrostatic equilibrium distribution of water contents in a 10 cm tall sample of the porous ceramic-aggregate Turface
subjected to (a) Earth's (1g), (b) Martian (0.38g), (c) Lunar (0.165g) and (d) zero-gravity (0g). The average hydraulic potential (i.e., at the
midpoint) is constant at -5 cm. The shaded area shows the regions of validity for water contents bounded by the primary draining and wetting
water retention curves where the hydrostatic distribution of hydraulic potentials scales with the gravitational force. Dynamic wetting and
draining processes may also traverse secondary characteristics in-between the primary characteristics creating unexpected heterogeneous
water-distribution profiles. Note that average sample water contents are not equal in the treatments.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of water in four gravity where hub and hlb indicate the upper and lower boundary
regimes illustrating the very different distributions of hydraulic potentials, respectively. Differences in 60(h)
water in a 10 cm tall root zone at identical management between 19 and 09 are shown in Figure 3_ In this figure,
0:9"". average hydraulic DQtht'al)- Non-Ilnear we assume a vertically centered membrane in a 10 cm
d'Str'bUt'OnS bounded by the primary water-retenthn tall sample supplying water at a negative potential given
response CWVGS at terrestrial 9r?V'ty (1.9) . shewn !n on the x-axis. Shown curves based on the primary
Figure 25‘ glye W‘f‘y to '93? nonI-Ilnear Q'Str'bUt'OnS. ”1 draining and wetting water retention characteristics
redueeq graVIty Wlth reductions In the linearly scaling depict the limits in Changes in 6—?) indicated by the
graVItlatIonatll pOteT'e}: Igradtlegt. tNoﬁef that ??t‘i‘get'fage shaded areas. Actual water content changes are likely to
(sjampte wa e1 con en ': r210 Ire” 'Cta ?rl e 'S n unons fall somewhere in-between the bounds with the
espl eequa average y raUIc p0 en 'a 3' occurrence of secondary draining and wetting
processes. From Figure 3 it is apparent that average
CHANGES IN THE AVERAGE CONTENT water contents in Turface could be elevated by up to 13
Th f t' t t' | t . t f t percent in zero gravity compared to Earth. For Profile,
h g $.39 9 ma ”C peten Ia Steh pollnsd to r rec.fonet significant over— and underestimations are possible
(1.51:1: ra Ion m rrllcrogijrayl ythmai/j' tgbn {ea f0 S'gm ICTh depending on the management set point, while average
' etfncteet “'0 'OntSt/m m e 'S n u :0” 0t wa etr “t"". water contents in Mix, having the widest pore-size
?hraVI y’t u ass m e aﬂetrhage sampfe wadertegnten Ir} distribution of these media, appear to be less affected.
etroe zone. ecagfhe: . het Eont'lﬁm orT. :3 n ”1'0th The width of the pore-size distribution and the air—entry
wa er m a samp e W' elg a .erres ”a gram y, e value then impact the changes in average water
average sample water content vanes from a physglly contents compared to Earth, where narrower pore-size
homogenous sample. The average water content 912%) distributions lead to increased differences.
of the sample is the integral of water contents over the
vertical extent of the sample divided by the height of the EFFECTS OF DYNAMIC DRAINING AND WETTING
sample at equilibrium: ON THE DISTRIBUTIONS
— 1 h“” Dynamic draining and wetting processes can result in
90(h) = — 90(h)dh (15) . .
L W Simultaneous traversals of secondary water retention

"
"7","characteristics resulting in unexpected water—content 0.15
distributions. These distributions are bounded by the
primary draining and wetting curves. To predict such 1""-\\,;==Turface
water—content distribution profiles in zero gravity, we 0.1 i “K /.~.\
used Hydrus 1-D (éimfmek et al. 2005) to solve Eq. (4). j ‘x‘ /' ‘25—»Proﬁle
Zero gravity was simulated by setting the decline-from- E O 05 \V/ \\
verticaI-axis angle to zero, simulating horizontal flow in ﬁg ' i -—.-.\ ‘\‘ .
the absence of gravity. In the example shown in Figure ‘3 5
4a, a sample of Profile was subjected to dissimilar |E O» -~~---~/-/ ,/ -.-.___m
draining and wetting sequences resulting in very i, // ,-’
different water distributions. These distributions are -0 05:: .I' V ‘ , , .
stable in zero gravity. The first considered case (solid ' \\ ,/ ""“(11“‘11}111g
red line in Figure 4a) results from a previous draining \~-./ —“""ettmg
with concurrent wetting. The second case (black line) -O.1l -‘ i *
results from a previous wetting with concurrent draining. O Meal?erdx‘atllig%ote11tial1725[-cm] 20
For this figure, we assumed a final suction in the center ’ ‘ ' ‘ ' ' "" '
of the sample (i.e. simulating a porous membrane) of -8 _ _ _ _
cmH2O- The shaded area in Figure 4a illustrates the Figure 3 Differences In average water content between terrestrial-
possible water content distributions in the sample at zero and zeroigrawty 6E a common ""Tea” hydram'c pOten.t'al' In the
gravity bounded by the primary draining and wetting zere graVIty case, h equals the height averaged potential on Earth
response. The dashed and dash-dotted line depict the acmeveo‘ “S'T‘g. .for example a vernal.” .centered porous
terrestrial primary draining and wetting water response memEIanei S'g:.'flcant over- ctr under-prhcatlons Of water are
curves for the given boundary conditions, respectively. poss' e usmgt Is managemen approac '
IMPACT OF ALTERED WATER-CONTENT centered membrane is pervious to liquids. The direction
DISTRIBUTIONS ON ROOT-ZONE FLUXES of gaseous fluxes was downward given a consumptive
use that establishes a gradient with respect to
The balance of antipodal liquid and gaseous diffusivities concentrations at the pervnous supply boundaries.
providing optimal fluxes of root resources determines BALANCE OF WATER AND GASEOUS FLUXES
root health and plant vigor. Altered water—content
distributions result in the reduction, and increased length These fluxes to given volume elements in the root zone
of, continuous gas-filled pathways for diffusive transport . . . . . .
compare d to terrestrial estimates. are an Integral process limited by the Iewest'c'ilffusIVIty
along the pathway, simply comparing diffusIVItIes for a
volume element as descriptors of design effectiveness
LIQUID FLUXES alone would be inappropriate. As a better descriptor we
On example of the water content distributions shown in suggest. the ratio of effective diffusivities of the gaseous
Figure 4a, the unsaturated hydraulic conductivities and “qu'd phase.
\(Iiljelgejrgredrcﬁitggduseiﬁzcgée. (Iﬂuid(g;fgﬂngefrégrggeugﬁvgly Using Eq. (15) we may estimatelthe vertical distribution
For the root zone under consideration, the centered 9f effective (or apparent)diffasIVIties for the gaseeus and
membrane served as the water source. Consequently, quwd phases where the ratio attempts te deSP'i'b? the
the direction of liquid fluxes in the media is up- and balance between. the Two' The ratio descriptor '8 similar
downward from the center following water content to the Gas D'foS'On Fingerprint (GDF) plot suggested by
gradients with respect to the top- and bottom-most root- “'0'qu et al. (2003)' The authors 989d. the Ihcremental
zone boundaries. The hysteretic derived water—content relative change (IRC) m 9389098 diffus'v'ty W'th. respect
distribution in the 09 cases resulted in non-Iinear to a change In aIr-filled porOSIty ('|.e. change I“ water
unsaturated hydraulic—conductivity distributions. For the centent) as a descriptbri ﬁber? h'gh IR? VTIUGS it a
effective water diffusivities in Figure 4c, fluxes to a given given .Ta.nc p0 en l? m Lgahe an Op. '.ma faﬁra '9”
volume element in the root zone are an integral process botentna (l'e' suggesting a '9 connectIVIty O .t e air-
Iimited by the lowestdiffusivity along the pathway. Wed .p'o're space). We feel that the change '.n I'qu'd
diffusIVItIes IS more descriptive than the change In water
content in relation to the IRC in gaseous diffusivities;
GASEOUS FLUXES including information on connected water—filled pathways
In Figure 4d we depict resulting effective gaseous along. With gas-tilied pathways. In addition, the use. Of
diffusivities estimated using Eq. (13). For the estimation effective d'ffus'v't'es.’ allows for root-zone deSIgn
of effective diffusivities, it is important to include effectiveness evaluations W'th respect to path lengths to
information on pervious and impervious boundaries to supply locations not feasible when “3'99 d'ffus'v't'e?’
the root zone allowing exchange of gases with the alone: In the case Of multipie supply Ilocatilons'a'n'd multi-
atmosphere. For the root zone under consideration the doma'“ geometries, the ratio Of effeCt'Ve.C.“foS'\/'t'es ""13y
topmost boundary is pervious to gases while, the eaSIIy be generalized as the superposmon of effective

"
"8","1 U _ “x . .r I I """"~ .
IH’) 13) HIE) ‘t d “- . I}!!! B) {—7315 1"" If W'sttttr ""H .
. ' I . ""Hum“: I r elimitml ‘5
3 I 11 l‘ I r! E i I"" i
.I 1I'L I III I III! I. f IIi I
‘E ' 1. 'II' 1 ii 'I I i .
3 5 1. ' [5 .II . I 1W Httll‘ _ f
1—: x . J, t I | 1 { h .
a: -.L..—_._.-*.... .m..-_-_-..-- .............{I ....~..-...ﬂn:~m-.lf...-..
E: ' ""b ' ' ""“‘ r ‘3 'I i f +
""'1' 5. ‘iIfI H“. ""II! [A I I r’
1],; 4 . I. I ""i. ii . 1!! .
m x. n “a Ii '{i 1 i r""
1'5..- if I R. {I I i I II""! .32
2 3‘1 I ‘5 I I i‘ ‘ i r’
I ""x If IH""_ I J I"" f I.
I! I- II: 1 ,r' I ”H . E _ {nu-rﬂz-tttluulgu
0 J”: 1"""" J"" l'l x” ‘I I I' 3' E-iimitcil
0.4 0.6 —-3 ~2 ~1 ~2 —-1 0 H2 ~1 0 H2 0 2
w 8 3
01} 3 _3 logK(h)_1 logDeﬂi logDeff logDLﬂc H
[CH1 cm ] [cm mm ] [cm2 mm‘l] [cm2 min_1] Dgﬁ
|:| [Jig range — 0g draiIlIr’u-‘ut — — — 0g wnt/dritin — 1g draining - — - — - 1g wetting
Figure 4 Impact of water distribution profiles (a) on water- and gaseous-transport properties (b--d) comparing confining draining and wetting
distributions in zero- and terrestrial gravity, as well as examples of dynamically established profiles in zero gravity. Confininging draining and
wetting distributions were estimated using Eq. (10) and (14) for the Profile medium with parameters listed in Table 1. For the sample, we
simulated a vertically centered hydration membrane controlling water in the sample at -8 cmHQO. (e) depicts the ratio estimator illustrating
the impact of altered water distribution on the achievement of balanced water- and gaseous-fluxes in the porous-medium profile.
diffusivities for each volume element with respect to of values for the ratio because root demands likely vary
each supply source: among species and microbial communities likely pose
dynamic demands with complex feedbacks that may be
I spatially distributed and are difficult to predict. It is
ED; eam further important to remember that plants are quite
5k : 1:1 (16) adaptable to root—zone co.nditions making a single
optimal value for the ratio unlikely.
ZDéueHm
i=1 CONCLUSIONS
where Sk iS the ratio descriptor for the kth volume The physical characteristics of porous plant—growth
element with the subscripts z and j referencing the media are crucial design characteristics because they
gaseous and liquid supply sources, respectively. determine the physical aspects of root function such as
water, nutrient and gas exchange that are most relevant
Figure 4e depicts the ratio estimator for balanced fluxes to root growth and plant vigor. Of these, water retention
based on the given water—content distributions. characteristics provide critical information on the
Terrestrial profiles of the ratio estimator show a concave distribution of water and air in root zones and are critical
behavior, where maximum values indicate balanced for the optimization of water and gaseous fluxes to plant
fluxes. Lower values of the estimator near the top of the roots in different gravity environments. For this,
root zone indicate root—zone conditions limited by water hysteresis in the WRC is key to predicting
fluxes with lower water contents and commensurate heterogeneous water distributions and should be
reductions in unsaturated hydraulic conductivity. Lower included in future modeling and design of root zones.
values near the bottom of the root zone indicate
conditions limited by gas exchange where long path Modeling results from this paper suggested that root-
Iengths across avariably saturated profile have reduced zone hypoxia in microgravity may be resultant of a
sustainable gaseous fluxes. Zero gravity profiles are combination of increased average water contents with a
shaped by the vertical water—content distribution and change in water distributions reducing the connectivity
supply locations illustrating but two possible cases. and increasing the tortuosity of gaseous pathways
Vertical profiles of 09 estimators fall below the needed for the exchange of respiratory gases.
estimators for 19 and 09 draining alone, indicating the
potential in improved management for providing more For the design of reduced gravity root zones, providing
optimal root—zone conditions for plant growth. Care balanced water and gaseous fluxes should consider
needs to be taken however in providing an optimal range effective diffusivities allowing a more accurate

"
"9","description of root-experienced fluxes. Combined with development of the 8VET space greenhouse

root- and microbial requirements, effective diffusivities equipment.

may then aid in the modeling and design of root zones Ivanova, T., 8. Doncheva, |. Ilieva, P. Kostov, 8.

providing more optimal resource supply locations and Sapunova, and R. Dikova. 2006. Experiment

management strategies. investigating the influence of oxygen deficiency
on plants grown in microgravity.

We feel that additional research may be needed for the Jones, 8., R. Heinse, G. Bingham, and D. Or. 2005.

advanced modeling of microscale fluxes in root zones. Modeling and Design of Optimal Growth Media

Current soiI-water flow models based on the Richards from PIant—Based Gas and Liquid Fluxes. 8AE

equation describe water movement only in the capillary Technical Paper 2005-01-2949.

pores. Plant effects on soil water are considered only as Jones, 8., and D. Or. 1998. Design of porous media for

a sink term accounting for root-water uptake. While root optimal gas and liquid fluxes to plant roots. 80”

distribution, soil hydraulic properties and water content Sci 800 Am J 62:563-573.

data are used for the Closure of the models, complex Jones, 8., and D. Or. 1999. Microgravity effects on water

feedback reactions and impacts of root systems both flow and distribution in unsaturated porous

spatially and temporally on the state variables and media: Analysis of flight experiments. Water

hydraulic properties (i.e. Changes in density, pore size Resour. Res. 35:929-942.

distribution, hydraulic conductivity) are mostly neglected. Jones, 8., D. Or, and G. Bingham. 2003. Gas diffusion

We therefore further suggest the need to study more measurement and modeling in coarse-textured

Closely the transport of water from the bulk media to the porous media. Vadose Zone J 2:602-610.

immediate root vicinity and finally into the root to explain Levine, H. G. 2003. Water Offset Nutrient Delivery

differences in plant vigor seen in restricted root zones in Experiment (WONDER). Ann. Report Dynamac
microgravity. Corp.
Moldrup, P., T. Olesen, P. 80hjonning, T. Yamaguchi,
and D. E. Rolston. 2000. Predicting the Gas

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Diffusion Coefficient in Undisturbed 80” from

80” Water Characteristics. Soil Sci 800 Am J

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from NA8A- 64394'100- .

JSC grants NAG 9-1284 and NAG 94399 Moldrup, P., S. Yoshlkawa, T. Olesen, T. Komatsu, and

D. E. Rolston. 2003. Gas Diffusivity in
Undisturbed Volcanic Ash 80ils: Test of 80”-
REFERENCES Water—CharacteristiC-Based Prediction Models.
. . Soil Sci 800 Am J 67:41-51.
van Bavgt, C'.1951' A sotl aeration theory based on Monje, 0., G. 8tutte, and D. Chapman. 2005-
lfoSIOn. 80|| SCI. 72.33-46. M' 't d t It | t t d

Bingham, (3., |. Podolsky, T. Topham, and J. Mulholland. 'CmgraV' y 093 “O a erpa“ 83“ gas
2002- Lada: The I88 plant substrate exchange of wheat at moderate light levels and
microgravity testbed 8AE Technical Paper saturating CO2 concentration. Planta 222:336-
2002-01-2388. ' 345. doi: 10.1007/300425-005-1529-1.

Chau, J., D. Or, and M. C. 8ukop. 2005. Simulation of Mualem,hYC.j 1916- A “3‘” {Fide'ffor prfd'ci”? the
gaseous diffusion in partially saturated porous y 5.3” 5V0?“ F30 'V' y oRuns1azura e porous
media under variable gravity with lattice M meMaE :9): Kesour. Ye; '8 C St t G E
Boltzmann methods. Water Resour Res. 41(8). usgravel, ' "" ' ' ”?“9’ ' Iao, I ' . O” ’ ' '

Collin, M., and A. Rasmuson. 1988. A comparison of gas Bingham, L' G' Brlarty, M'.A' Levak'kh’ V' N'

. . . . 8 Chev and |. G. Podolskl. 2000. Gravnt
dlfoSlVlty models for unsaturated porous media. . y ’ . . y
80” Science Society of America Journal Independence Of seed-to—eeed cycling m
52:1559-1565. BraSSIca rapa. Planta 210.400-408. . .
van Genuchten, M. 1980. A Closed-form equation for Or, D"" M' Tuller, and S' B' Jones. 2009' L'ICIUId Behavnor
. . . . . In Partially 8aturated Porous Media under
predicting the hydraulic conductIVIty of . . . . _
unsaturated soils. Soil Sci. 800. Am. J. 44:892- Varlable GraVIty. .80” SCI SOC Am J 73:341—350'
898. Podolsky, |.', and A. Mashtnsky. .1994. Pecullantles of

Haslam, |. 2006. Lattice Boltzmann Matlab Scripts. monsture transfer m capIIIaIry-porous SO”
Retrieved March 26, 2009’ from ﬁlibggtzges during space flight. Adv. Space Res.
http://www.exo|ete.com/code/Ibm. . ' '

Heinse, R., 8. B. Jones, 8. L. 8teinberg, M. Tuller, and Porterfleld, D' M"" S' W' Matthews, C' J.‘ Daugherty, and
D. Or. 2007. Measurements and Modeling of M' E' Musgrave. 1997' Spaceflight Exposure
Variable Gravity Effects on Water Distribution Effects 09 Transcription, ACt'V'ty’ and .
and Flow in Unsaturated Porous Media. Vadose Localization of AICOhOI Dehydrogenase In'the
Zone J 6:713-724. doi: 10.2136/vzj2006.0105. Roots of ArabIdOpSIs thaIIana. Plant Physnol.

Ivanova, T. N., 8. M. Sapunova, P. T. Kostov, and |. |. P rt rf' 12138683633- . G St tt d M M
||ieva. 2005. Recent advances in the 0 e 'e ’ "" ' onJe, ' 9 e, an ' usgrave.

2000. Rootzone hypOXIC responses result from

"
"10","inhibition of gravity dependent oxygen transport fluid behavior in plant growth media under
in microgravity. Gravita Space Biol Bull 14:50. microgravity. SAE Technical Paper 2005-01-
Richards, L. A. 1931. Capillary conduction of liquids 2947.
through porous mediums. Physics 1:318—333. Stout, S. C., D. M. Porterfield, L. G. Briarty, A. Kuang,
éimfmek, J., M. T. V. Genuchten, and M. éejna. 2005. and M. E. Musgrave. 2001. Evidence of Root
The HYDRUS—1 D Software Package for Zone Hypoxia in Brassica rapa L. Grown in
Simulating the One-Dimensional Movement of Microgravity. International Journal of Plant
Water, Heat, and Multiple Solutes in Variably- Sciences 162:249-255.
Saturated Media. Stutte, G. W., O. Monje, G. D. Goins, and B. C. Tripathy.
Steinberg, S. L., and D. Poritz. 2005. Measurement of 2005. Microgravity effects on thylakoid, single
Hydraulic Characteristics of Porous Media Used leaf, and whole canopy photosynthesis of dwarf
to Grow Plants in Microgravity. Soil Sci. Soc. wheat. Planta 223:46-56. doi: 10.1007/300425-
Am. J. 69:301-310. 005-0066-2.
Steinberg, S. L., and D. L. Henninger. 1997. Response
of the Water Status of Soybean to Changes in CONTACT
Soil Water Potentials Controlled by the Water
Pressure in MiCFOPOFOUS Tubes. Plant C9” Robert Heinse, Assistant Professor, Dept. Plants, Soils
Environm. 20115064516 and Entomological Sciences, University of Idaho,
Steinberg, 8-, S- Jones, M- Xiao, L- Reddi, 6- Moscow, ID 83844-2339; Email: rheinse@uidaho.edu
Kluitenberg, D. Or, J. Alexander, N. Daidzic, and
M. Tuller. 2005. Challenges to understanding

"
