"","x"
"1","J BMR®
O O
Skeletal Health In Long-Duratlon Astronauts:
Nature, Assessment, and Management
0 0
Recommendations from the NASA Bone Summit
Eric S Orwoll,1 Robert A Adler,2 Shreyasee Amin,3 Neil Binkley,4 E Michael Lewiecki,5
Steven M Petak,6 Sue A Shapses,7 Mehrsheed Sinaki,8 Nelson B Watts,9 and Jean D Sibonga1O
1Bone and Mineral Unit, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA
2Department of Endocrinology, McGuire Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine, Richmond, VA, USA
3Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
4Osteoporosis Clinical Center and Research Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
5New Mexico Clinical Research & Osteoporosis Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA
6Texas Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Endocrinology, Houston, TX, USA
7Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
8Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
9Mercy Health Osteoporosis and Bone Health Services, Cincinnati, OH, USA
10Human Health and Performance Directorate, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA
ABSTRACT
Concern about the risk of bone loss in astronauts as a result of prolonged exposure to microgravity prompted the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration to convene a Bone Summit with a panel of experts at the Johnson Space Center to review the medical data and
research evidence from astronauts who have had prolonged exposure to spaceﬂight. Data were reviewed from 35 astronauts who had
served on spaceﬂight missions lasting between 120 and 180 days with attention focused on astronauts who (1) were repeat ﬂiers on long-
duration missions, (2) were users of an advanced resistive exercise device (ARED), (3) were scanned by quantitative computed
tomography (QCT) at the hip, (4) had hip bone strength estimated by ﬁnite element modeling, or (5) had lost >10% ofareal bone mineral
density (aBMD) at the hip or lumbar spine as measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). Because of the limitations of DXA
in describing the effects of spaceﬂight on bone strength, the panel recommended that the US. space program use QCT and ﬁnite
element modeling to further study the unique effects of spaceﬂight (and recovery) on bone health in order to better inform clinical
decisions. © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
KEY WORDS: SPACEFLIGHT; OSTEOPOROSIS; QCT; FINITE ELEMENT MODELING; DXA; FRACTURE; MICROGRAVITY
Introduction (aBMD) at weight-bearing skeletal sitesm) With the construc-
— tion of the International Space Station (ISS), these concerns
Since the early days of manned spaceﬂight, the US. National reached a higher level of importance, because astronauts were
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has been now capable of living and working in space for extended
concerned about potential adverse effects of prolonged durations and potentially suffering adverse skeletal consequen-
weightlessness, including bone atrophy due to the lack of ces. The risk of fractures is of particular concern upon re-
forces (muscular and gravitational) on the skeleton““” and exposure to mechanical loading, such as during the exploration
general deconditioning under spaceﬂight conditions.(2'5‘8) of unknown planetary terrain or return to Earth’s full gravity
Consequently, the major thrust of research has focused on ﬁeld. Moreover, cumulative skeletal deconditioning could
better understanding the pathophysiology of increased urinary increase the risks for premature osteoporosis and for fractures
excretion of calcium(9'1°) and loss of areal bone mineral density in later life.
Received in original form November 6, 2012; revised form March 4, 2013; accepted March 20, 2013. Accepted manuscript online April 2, 2013.
Address correspondence to: Jean D Sibonga, PhD, Bone & Mineral Laboratory SK/272, NASA Johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, TX 77058.
E-mail: Jean.sibonga-1@nasa.gov
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, Vol. 28, No. 6, June 2013, pp 1243—1255
DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1948
© 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research
1243 I

"
"2","Limited data exist for understanding the bone loss and is difﬁcult to investigate the effects of space on bone, or of the
fracture risk in astronauts. Typically, NASA astronauts are young different interventions for bone loss in the ﬂight environment,
to middle-aged (ranging from 25 to 55 years), and are when the number of long-duration astronauts is so small.
predominantly male (malezfemale ratio ~5:1). In contrast to To solicit clinical guidance, experts in osteoporosis, endocri-
patient populations with recognized risk factors for bone loss nology, rheumatology, gerontology, and physical medicine and
and fracture, astronauts are physically ﬁt and healthy. Despite rehabilitation, with subspecialties in bone densitometry, bone
this, it is plausible that long-duration spaceﬂight (deﬁned by epidemiology, male osteoporosis, and nutrition, were convened
NASA as longer than 30 days) would have measurable by NASA in 2010 as a Bone Summit Panel. The panel was to
detrimental short-term and long-term impacts on bone health. evaluate what NASA is currently doing to manage an
Generally, long-duration astronauts have lived aboard a occupational risk for fractures that may occur later in life. The
spacecraft, such as Mir or the current ISS, for 120 to 180 days panel was asked to recommend the skeletal measures that would
and the skeletal effects of these missions are not easily modeled be useful for the selection of astronauts and the surveillance of
on Earth.Equivalenttoarare syndrome,space-induced boneloss premature osteoporosis, the measured outcome that would
is expected to affect onlya small number ofindividuals, the total serve as a trigger for possible medical intervention, and the
of which will probably not exceed 100 by the end of the ISS measures that should be used to evaluate the efﬁcacy of
program in 2020. Table 1 outlines speciﬁc characteristics of the countermeasures being studied during spaceﬂight. As noted,
long-duration astronaut cohort as of 2010. evaluating trends in astronaut data is limited by the measures

The complexities of spaceﬂight—induced bone loss in a small available, the delayed accumulation ofdata and the small sample
understudied population raise the question of whether current size of astronauts. The Bone Summit Panel reviewed all available
assessments of skeletal health in astronauts are sufﬁcient. NASA is bone-relevant data accumulated from long-duration astronauts
legally and ethically responsible for providing a safe and healthy who served on the Mir spacecraft and/or the ISS. All data were
work environment”) Bone strength must be considered in the from astronauts who are employed by NASA; no biomedical data
selection of candidates for the corps of astronauts that will from cosmonauts or astronauts employed by the international
participate in future ﬂights. In addition, skeletal deﬁcits due to space agencies were released for chart review. Tools for risk
spaceﬂight that persist after return to Earth’s gravity should be surveillance and recommendations for future research devel-
monitored because they might predispose astronauts to prema- oped at this conference are presented here.
ture fragility fractures soon after return to Earth or later in life.

It is a current medical requirement to assess the skeletal integrity Charge to Bone Summit Panel
of all astronaut candidates by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry —
(DXA), and to monitor bone health of all active and retired NASA The panel was asked to review data relevant to mineral
astronauts likewise by triennial measurements of bone density. metabolism and to bone structure, density, turnover, and
Moreover, DXA scans are required before and after missions in all strength that were collected from long-duration astronauts
ISS astronauts, ie, those with prolonged habitation of space (>30 from 1994 to 2010. Over this period, data were acquired from 35
days), to evaluate the skeletal effects of spaceﬂight and to monitor long-duration astronauts. All measures conducted immediately
the restoration to preﬂight status. However, many other tests for postﬂight were within 1 month of landing. These data included
evaluating the skeletal effects of spaceﬂight, including assays for (1) the effects of resistive exercise during ﬂight on aBMD (g/cmz)
gonadal hormones and quantitative computed tomography(QC'l), as measured immediately postﬂight by DXA, (2) levels of
are by astronaut consent only. Regardless of the technique used, it endocrine regulators and biochemical markers of bone
Table 1. Characteristics of the Long-Duration Astronaut Cohort at Time of Bone Summit (2010)

Astronauts on long-duration missions

Males (n = 29) Females (n = 6)
Typical space mission duration (days) 161 3:36 (58—215) 165 3:39 (90—194)
Average age at time of flight (years) 47 i5 (37—55) 45 i4 (41—53)
Body mass index (ng/m) 25.8 i 2.0 (21 .2—30.7) 23.4 i 2.4 (20.4—25.9)
Body weight (kg) 80 i 6 (63—97) 67 i 8 (57—82)
Height (cm) 176 i 6 (163—185) 170 i4 (165—178)
Total body lean mass (kg) 61 i5 (45—69) 47 i5 (39—54)
Total body fat mass (kg) 163:4 (6—27) 193: 7 (13—33)
% Body fat 20 i4 (9—27) 27 i 8 (19—41)

All values in table are means i SD (with range in parentheses). In 2010, relative to the NASA Astronaut Corps (total 331 astronauts), the cohort of long—
duration astronauts is 33 astronauts and predominantly male (ratio of males to females 29:6 or 4821). Of this group, 4 astronauts have served on two
separate long—duration spaceﬂights out of a total of 39 separate spaceﬂight missions. The traits of the corps have been consistent with time; over the
2 years since the Bone Summit, the total number of long—duration crewmembers has increased to 55, the number of repeat ﬂiers has increased by 1 and the
total number ofﬂights has increased by 12. For computed averages, the astronaut data (eg, age, duration, body composition data) forthe second ﬂight was
treated as if there was another separate astronaut.

I 1244 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"3","remodeling, (3) changes immediately postﬂight in DXA meas- standards for bone health in astronauts include T—score cut-
ures, (4) changes immediately postﬂight in compartmental points (NASA-STD-3001 NASA Space Flight Human System
volumetric BMD (vBMD,g/cm3) ofcortical and trabecular bone as Standard, Crew Health); a T—score of —1.0 or less at the hip or
assessed by QCT, and (5) serial changes in both DXA and QCT lumbar spine has disqualiﬁed an applicant from the astronaut
measurements after return to Earth. corps, partially because of the expectation that an astronaut
During a closed session, medical records of individual long- might develop at T—score of —2.0 or less after spaceﬂight, based
duration astronauts were reviewed. The 25 cases were selected on a calculated average monthly loss of 1.0% to 1.5% aBMD
(with some duplication) as a result of the presence of a unique during long-duration spaceﬂightm) Among astronauts selected,
trait or an extreme skeletal response to space, as follows: (1) this criterion also serves as a reason for disqualiﬁcation from
female (n = 6); (2) repeat ﬂiers on Iong—duration mission (n :4); long-duration missions. When considering the use of any
(3) users of new (since 2009) advanced resistive exercise device countermeasure to prevent bone loss, it is expected that the
(ARED) for the weightless environment (n = 5); (4) those scanned intervention will ensure that an astronaut returns from a mission
by QCT (n = 10); (5) those with hip bone strength estimated by with a T—score of —2.0 or better.
ﬁnite element modeling (FEM)—a computational tool used to Figure1 displays astronaut medical data that were available at
estimate failure loads of complex structures—(n:7); and (6) the time of the Bone Summit, which includes the ﬁrst 23 ISS
those with a loss ofaBMD >10% in either the hip or spine (n = 6). expeditions. Changes in aBMD due to spaceﬂight have been
In addition, relevant published data studying long-duration quantiﬁed by serial DXA who|e-body measures or regional
astronauts were reviewed. Some preliminary data from research scanning of the hip (total hip, femoral neck, and trochanter),
studies currently in progress had been available for review but lumbar spine, and forearm (Fig. 2). Notably, after spaceﬂight all
are not included here. This report summarizes the data presented long-duration astronauts showed a loss in aBMD exceeding the
and the panel’s conclusions and recommendations. least signiﬁcant change (LSC) in at least one of these skeletal
regions,(4) and some astronauts had a >10% aBMD loss at both
Long-Duration Astronaut Data: Bone Loss the hip and lumbar spine. (Note: Hologic QDR 4500 and QDR
and Recovery 2000 were used for measurement of astronaut BMD. For QDR
, , , 4500, LSC is 0.019 [trochanter], 0.035 [femoral neck], and 0.025 g/
DenSItometry and blochemlstry cm2 [lumbar spine], and the LSC for the Hologic QDR 2000 was
0.024 [trochanter], 0.050 [femoral neck], and 0.035 [lumbar
DXA . 2 .
spine]. All values g/cm .) However, no long-duration astronaut
Since 1998, NASA medically required measurements of aBMD by returned from spaceﬂight with a hip or lumbar spine T—score |ess
DXA to assess skeletal integrity of astronauts. NASA’s medical than or equal to —2.5. The panel was asked how NASA should
BMD T-Score Values Expeditions 1-23
3.5
3 E:
2.5
1'5 h\ Ar §“\~A
1 f\\\\13 N
g 0.5 “?;u RA . $2
2 o . 5 wr- ""; ﬁﬁﬁq
-o.5 g S I§ E I :\
z. \ ‘ . 3%;
-1 ﬂ 6— ‘5 FA'<\
A ""Q
-1.5 E E 3. m \A
-2 Q 4\“
-2.5 “A
-3
Pre- Lumbar Post— Lumbar Pre- Femoral Post- Femoral Pre- POSt'
Spine Spine Neck Neck Trochanter Trochanter
Fig. 1. Areal BMD T—scores for skeletal regions of hip and spine in astronauts before and after ISS missions. T—scores were calculated according to
procedures ofthe ISCD from preﬂight and postﬂight measurements ofareal BMD by DXA. Thirty sets of preﬂight to postﬂight measurements were from 27
different U.S. astronauts (23 ISS spaceﬂight expeditions, some with multiple or previously ﬂown U.S. crewmembers). Changes in T—scores are superimposed
on the ISCD diagnostic guidelines for osteoporosis (T—scores g —2.5) developed for perimenopausal and postmenopausal women, and men over the age of
50. T—scores between —1.0 and —2.5 represent the low bone mass range (osteopenia). These diagnostic criteria were the only evidence—based guidelines
available for evaluating skeletal integrity when BMD measurements by DXA became the medicaIIy—required test for Iong—duration astronaut crew health
(internal document, NASA Med Vol. B). Clinical decisions and medical standards for human health and performance at NASA are based upon these
diagnostic guidelines. ISCD : International Society for Clinical Densitometry.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG-DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1245 I

"
"4","3
A
2
%,
E 1 W?
313 _ ’ A o A A 5
E o f—8 -—§~r— aﬂﬂ—ﬂ—Aﬂeaﬁ— T’Q'ﬁ
u‘: 0 ‘2. A O A Q I; A- g
0 z‘ A a 5:.
A EA .élt
5 _2 _—Q— _§ —.8— OMir
°\° o 3
O 3 ‘ 0 § OISSIRED
-3 _—O:— AISS ARED/Bisphos
. . —Means
4 —
LSpine Fem. Neck Trochanter Total Hip Wrist
Fig. 2. Distribution of DXA aBMD percentage changes after long—duration Mir or ISS spaceﬂight. Percentage change of preﬂight aBMD per month was
calculated by subtracting the ﬁrst postﬂight DXA BMD measurement from the preﬂight measurement and normalizing by the mission duration (typically
4—6 months). Data are plotted for groups ofcrewmembers who served on Mir (n : 28 cosmonauts, and n : 7 U5. astronauts), on ISS with access to only the
iRED for weight—bearing exercises (n : 24 U5. astronauts), and on ISS after the ARED became available (n : 8 crewmembers). BMD changes are reported
for LSpine, Fem.Neck, trochanter, total hip, and wrist. (Wrist is 1/3 radius+ ulna, and is for ISS crewmembers only.) All mean aBMD changes from preﬂight to
postﬂight, for all groups, were signiﬁcant (p < 0.05), as determined by Student’s ttest (one—tailed, paired), except for the effect of ARED on lumbar spine
and wrist (p < 0.06 for trochanter). ARED users include crewmembers who were concurrently taking a bisphosphonate (n : 3), crewmembers with access
to ARED for <4 months (n : 3), in addition to crewmembers with ARED access for the entire spaceﬂight (N6 months) and not taking bisphosphonates
(n : 2). Astronaut measurements had to be combined to ensure nonidentiﬁable data. LSpine : lumbar spine; Fem.Necszemoral neck.
interpret and utilize these data to assess fracture risk in to increase in the postﬂight period (Fig. 4). However, there is
astronauts. considerable heterogeneity in the extent to which aBMD is
According to NASA medical health standards,(13) the preﬂight regained after ﬂight with some astronauts appearing to have a
aBMD requirement for ﬂight certiﬁcation is based on an persistent deﬁcit. Notably, DXA measurement of aBMD is often
estimated total spaceﬂight—related decline in aBMD originally the only index considered when evaluating the efﬁcacy of in—
reported in 18 cosmonautsm) An average monthly rate ofaBMD ﬂight bone loss countermeasures and the return of bone health
loss was calculated from data from Mirmissions(conducted from following ﬂight. Overall, there is concern that DXA may
1995 to 1998) ranging in duration from 4 to 14 months“” and underestimate skeletal risks due to spaceﬂight and reambulation
was used to predict likely aBMD loss for other mission designs. on Earth, highlighting the potential utility of expanding
Although there were insufﬁcient measurements to assess measurements of bone beyond DXA aBMD to obtain enhanced
whether the loss during ﬂight was linear, there was an overall estimations of bone strength and fracture risk.“6)
average 1.0% to 1.5% aBMD decline per month for hip and
lumbar spine. This ﬁnding highlighted the accelerated rate of , .
aBMD loss at weight-bearing skeletal sites during spaceﬂight, Quantitative computed tomography
contrasting starkly with the typical age-related rate of bone loss In 1998, a ﬂight experiment was conducted to evaluate the
of 0.5% to 1.0% per year for comparable sites in older individuals effects of spaceﬂight on QCT parameters at the hip and lumbar
on Earth. A similar rate of ﬂight—related bone loss was found spine in ISS astronauts.“7'18)Whole-bone geometry and vBMD of
in US. crewmembers on ISS expeditions ﬂown from 2000 to cortical,trabecular,and integral bone (cortical+trabecular) were
2009. Since 2009, the availability of the ARED on the ISS (Fig. 3A) measured 30 to 60 days before spaceﬂight, 7 to 10 days after
may have attenuated the aBMD decline in the astronauts“) by landing, and 1 year after landing.“7'18) |n ISS astronauts (n = 16),
providing load-bearing exercise up to 600 pound force (lbf). This vBMD declined at variable rates (Table 2A) at lumbar spine and
exercise capability contrasts with that of the previously-used hip trabecular and integral bone measurement sites.“7)
interim resistive exercise device (iRED) (Fig. 3B), which provided Spaceﬂight resulted in a reduction in total hip bone mineral
only one-half of the resistance loading of the ARED. Coincident content. As reported, the reduced volume of cortical tissue (cm3),
with the change from using iRED to ARED, the average monthly in combination with a stable total tissue volume (cm3) suggested
loss in aBMD decreased from roughly1.0%(n:24iRED users) to that cortical thickness was reduced because of endocortical
0.3% to 0.5% per month (n = 11 ARED users to-date, unpublished resorption.“7) In the spine, accelerated vBMD losses that
NASA data). Likewise, there is a consistent trend, observed in occurred in integral bone were comparable to losses in
data from 45 different long-duration crewmembers,“5) for aBMD trabecular bone.“7) QCT measures of the lumbar spine did not
I 1246 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"5","':. ‘- 1 V 1 I “x“ \
‘ - J ,1“ . . V 3- , , \ 10
A-‘ ""-;""\rtl_ “15: V. I, O__ ,‘f. . "" ""A‘ A ”———.__—_—
k.\1 ,1 <— t 1 g s , 1 .. 1 .
,. ¥\§ \ 3 1’ l. f“; 0 , ‘ --___ .1
4 «\C\ ' {in g r ’ Ed} ‘: ’ ’ . .
L‘wri ’_ a a 5 4‘ 4? ? -5 : -|. O .
R €1*42.\. {/11 t f ———___———
I' . 1 ,1 g -10 aI' ’-
' >1 ‘ o.
1 . 27%“ (D T
1 ‘ a —15
.Q
.. '1‘ ' 1. g I Fitted Values
_ vii) [[‘w' L . 1 ;, —1 —20 BMD change intercept: -4.9
,3, E 1|- I Half Life: 151 days
i ' ‘ -25
. - - ~ 0 300 600 900 1200 1500
‘5' I . I"" l ""- hill
1 ‘ ' ._ , . B Days After Recovery
\1 1 1 ‘Qﬂ 1° _______._
_ '- ’4 : i r ' LL; ’ ’ ’ -—- . O
. 1 \:5 6:5 5 /’
:1 \ .1 ' 1&7 ' ‘ “:1 ‘ ° . + ' '.
. -- I\/I&( gﬁt 1 ‘i W. ‘D 0 t '4. + . : f
\ '1 :‘ir\‘wiﬂia .2 ._.. é . +° ° . O. .
, 1 f ""1"" hm “ “ ""‘v: ?'— ~ 8 co. 0 o
’1, K! 1: I {:52 'r ‘ . a .1 . E '5 1 + 0.. . .
Mysg' j; ,6 _, » “E .. to ’ °
V . ‘ q.’ ’17,. 0’ 1 310 . ' __...—u--—---————————
g. V 5‘1‘1/1! I 1:15?!” V ‘ g . O l/ I ’— O .
\ ‘7 _ g, _ i C ,‘9 i u. A . ,1. , a + / /l
.- \_ . __ ’ - . 5;; 0, $45
\\ ""1; l . .. ‘1 g I
ﬁr \ . I 8 -20 + I Fitted Values
~ E $2: ~r~ $2 I BMD change intercept = —6.8
- ILDQ \ 8 HaIfLife= 211 days
(L) -25
v 1’ ""7:-_\ ' / 0 300 600 900 1200 1500
\ Days After Recovery
B .. , v . v
1""” ° ‘ \ ”wk”; 4 “' '11-“. . , Fig. 4. Representative trends in aBMD recovery in the lumbar spine (A)
"""" N. 51” - mi ' :5"" df I k B f I d ' ' ' Th
. . J. {\qu __/,./ I ‘ ‘ \.a-' g: \ . - an emora nec ( ) a ter a ong— uratlon mISSIon. e percentage
.1 (i I 1i. 0191;."" $ 1...; ii"" 17:» :9 change in aBMD from the preﬂight value is plotted as a function of days
V f T :5, a. a rﬂ_L afterlanding (when DXA scans were performed).The scatter—plot displays
a :“I ' ﬂ ""7- ? .__ mfg“. ! 1 both longitudinal and cross—sectional data from US. and Russian long—
; =1 ,l I ‘1 5"" ii- 1 duration crewmembers (n =45) from 56 different long—duration missions
7’ ??g‘uxg. ,1 1’ ‘ I ‘ 1 H “ 1
“/42ng ‘1‘ _, 1 11‘: l' 1-‘- ~ 1;), \J \ . 3"" (”pluses” denote data from a repeat ﬂier). Data were ﬁtted to a
11;, ‘33,; s, ’ '1, L I N F > _. mathematical equation (solid line) with 95% conﬁdence limits (dashed
, V‘A I B1” “ q \ 4‘ m ""35' ‘ |ines).The intersection ofthe horizontal dotted line with the y—axis = 50%
V; [cm é «6"" : '3’ "":._\11 “‘5 ' .1 3. . ' .“ 1. , __ of the average bone loss due to spaceﬂight and the Intersection of the
- ” ‘ ‘5 1 » , .T—ﬁ “A _ L. : \- ' vertical dotted line with the X—axis=the number of days needed to
,1 l‘W"" - £2 / ' 5% g ""1' _ recover 50% of lost bone (”halflife”).|n general, the recovery ofaBMD for
*/i 12:?” 1,9 1 £3 i 7 1 #1,: Pie: ‘1 :9 all sites measured was prolonged, with the time needed to regain mass
)1 ,4 '.7g;\7_;‘/_'_'_,-_LF . 7:?33 _if'_‘ 11 F5! ,1 ‘ being greater than the time for loss of mass to occur. Recovery of aBMD
580175606635 ' 7 ’ ’ * :3 ""7"" E 7' 4* '7 ' ' ‘ does not necessarily reﬂect a recovery pattern for bone strength
(Adapted from Sibonga and colleagues(15)).
Fig. 3. (A) ARED. A crewmember performs a deadlift exercise on the
ARED, which delivers up to 600 pound force (Ibf) resistance exercise.
Installed in December 2009, the ARED is used by crewmembers 3 to provide additional information about spaceﬂight-induced
6 days per week. It can provide high loads to the lower back, hip, knee, Changes above and beyond DXA aBMD.(17) In contrast, as further
and anklelo'nts' The grow mean ded'nes 'n aBMD dur'ng ﬂ'ght appear described in Table 23, OCT can provide additional information at
reduced since the ARED was made available on the ISS, although in some . . . .
_ _ the hip regarding spaceﬂight-Induced changes, and recovery
of these astronauts, the beneﬁCIal effects of ARED on aBMD may be In ,
_ _ _ _ _ after return. QCT revealed that after 12 months of reambulatlon
combination With bisphosphonate use. In 2 cases, postﬂight aBMD has . . ,
. . . . on Earth, total hip bone volume Increased at both the prOXImal
Increased for lumbar spine relative to preﬂlght BMD. Photo courtesy of . .
NASA. (B) iRED. A crewmember performs a squat exercise on iRED. The femur (total WP) and femoral neck whereas the VBMD was 5“”
iRED hardware was the primary mode of resistance exercise on the ISS decreased 18 (ratlo postﬂlght VBMD/preﬂlght VBMD <1;
from mid—2001 to 2010.TheiRED delivered upto 300lbfofresistive force Table 23)-( ) This readaptation t0 Earth’s 19 ﬁeld in middle-
through two canister assemblies (N150 lb each). BMD losses were aged astronauts is reminiscent of the expansion of bone’s cross—
reported at ~1.1% per month when the iRED and treadmill only were sectional area observed with aging in terrestrial populations and
available for CFGW USG- PhOtO courtesy 01‘ NASA- with weight loss.(19'2°) Therefore, as part of a study extension, a
fourth QCT hip scan was obtained 2 to 4 years after ﬂight in 8 of
the original 16 ISS crewmembers. Figure 5 displays different
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG—DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1247 I

"
"6","Table 2. (A) Changes in the Hip (Femoral Neck and Trochanter) and Lumbar Spine Measured in Astronauts After Return From Missions on
the ISSa
Index DXA aBMD %/M0nth (n = 14) Index QCT vBMD % Change/month (n = 14)
Lumbar spine —0.8 i 0.5 Integral lumbar spine —0.9 i 0.5
Trabecular lumbar spine —0.7 i 0.6
Femoral neck —1.1 i0.5 Integral femoral neck —1.2 i 0.7
Trabecular femoral neck —2.7 i 1.9
Trochanter —1.2 i 0.9 Integral trochanter —1.5 i 0.9
Trabecular trochanter —2.2 i 0.9
(B) Changes at the Hip (Femoral Neck and Proximal Femur) With Reambulation on Earth by QCT Measurements in 16 ISS Astronautsb
% Spaceflight change % Reambulation change Ratio of 1 year postflight
(means i SD) (means i SD) to preflight
Femoral neck
Total vBMD (g/cm3) —9.4 i 64* 0.9 i 5.9 0.91**
Total BMC (g) —10.8i10.6* 8.1 i11.8* 0.96
Cortical volume (cm?) —8.0 i 1 1.2* 8.0 i 1 1.8* 0.99
Total volume (cm3) —1.4 i109 7.2 i 9.9* 1.05
Total proximal femur
Total vBMD (g/cm3) —10.4 i —9.7* 4.4 i 4.7* 0.93**
Total BMC (g) —1 1.1 i11.2* 12.2i11.8* 0.99
Cortical volume (cm3) —9.2 i 10.8* 11.5 i 12.2* 1.01
Total volume (cm?) —0.7 i 101* 7.2 i 73* 1.06
aAII values are means i SD of aBMD by DXA and of vBMD by QCT performed in identical ISS astronauts (n : 14). Integral vBMD is measurement of
combined cortical and trabecular bonem) At the lumbar spine, QCT measurement of vBMD did not generate additional information beyond DXA aBMD.
Measurements were conducted as soon after spaceﬂight as possible (ie, within days).(17)
IOAll values for vBMD, BMC, cortical and total bone volumes are group means i SD for ISS astronauts (n : 16). Data for 2 additional crewmembers were
obtained since the earlier report in 2004”” Absolute BMD values were used to generate the ratio of postﬂight to preﬂight measurements.
ISS : International Space Station; aBMD : areal bone mineral density; DXA : dual—energy X—ray absorptiometry; QCT : quantitative computed
tomography; vBMD : volumetric BMD; BMC : bone mineral content; BMD : bone mineral density.
*Signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) difference from preﬂight values.
**Signiﬁcant difference between 1 year postﬂight and preﬂight measurements“)
patterns of recovery in the hip and spine as assessed by DXA and FEM estimates of hip strength are approximately double the
QCT scans. In Fig. 5A, there is a tendency for aBMD to recover in monthly rate of decrease in aBMD (Table 3).(22) Figure 6 shows
the lumbar spine (L1—L4) after return, whereas trabecular vBMD, the correlation between the spaceﬂight-related (preﬂight to
in QCT scans of L1 and L2 (Fig.53), declines aftertheﬁrst year in all postﬂight) changes in FEM strength and aBMD. There was little
but 1 astronaut. A similar discordant pattern is noted in Fig. 5C, D, correlation between DXA and either of the two loading models
where femoral neck aBMD in most individuals increased over the (R2 = 0.23 for one-Iegged stance and R2 = 0.05 for posterolateral
ﬁrst year after return to Earth; however, 1 astronaut whose fall).(22) These data do not indicate whether DXA or FEM is
femoral neck aBMD exceeded preﬂight measurements 4 years superior in predicting bone health but do suggest that FEM may
after return, showed a reduction in trabecular vBMD over the capture changes in bone that DXA does not.(22)
same period?”
Bone turnover markers
FEM Figure 7 displays the group trends in biochemical markers of
To translate bone density data to an estimation of bone strength, bone turnover from US. crewmembers aboard both the ISS and
FE models were developed from hip QCT scans of 11 ISS Russian Mir spacecraft.(23) The data for N-telopeptide (NTX)
astronauts.(17'22) FEM is a computational tool that estimates hip measures from 24-hour non-fasted urine specimens suggest that
strength (in Newtons, N, offorce) for speciﬁc loading orientations bone resorption increased early during Iong-duration missions
(Table 3). FEM detected a signiﬁcant decline in hip strength after and remained elevated throughout the period of weightlessness
spaceﬂight (group meansiSD) for two modeled orientations of but was restored to baseline status upon return to Earth.(23) In
loading (axial loading in one-Iegged stance and posterolateral contrast, the concentration of bone-speciﬁc alkaline phospha-
Ioading that assumes falling backward to the side).(22) When tase (BAP), a marker of bone formation (Fig. 7), was reduced or
declines in hip strength were divided by total months in space, as unchanged during spaceﬂight,(23) suggesting that an uncoupling
similarly reported for loss of DXA aBMD, the monthly decrease in of bone resorption and formation occurs. The increase in bone
I 1248 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal Of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"7","A 1.05 C 195
‘ _
O
Q ’ c Q 1 ' ..
2 A
.. 1 _ - _ 3 W
8 or/ )i—r——- “o . 7' V» ..
g I O g 0'95 , V""\
a 0.95 — g /
Z I 20 0.9 —
0.9 0 85
B Days After landing D Days After Landing
1.1 1.05
1
1.05 ‘
D .\ g 0.95 .\ #—' *
2 0 0,9 ""3;"" ‘=;‘~ _— _
co 1 9° ' M\. .
,5 0.95 ‘ ﬂ .
.5 VA. E 0.8 /\
g o. ’-‘ EaM—— —
o ' . o
z z 0.7 7———
0’85 . I 0.65 —
0.8 0-5
0 300 600 900 1200 1500 1800 0 300 600 900 1200 1500 1800
Days After Landing Days After Landing
Fig. 5. Different individual trends in QCT and DXA data ofthe lumbar spine and femoral neck of ISS astronauts after return to earth. Eight crewmembers of
the original 16 who participated in the QCT ﬂight studym) consented to an additional scan to evaluate recovery beyond 1 year after return to Earth. The
fourth QCT scans were performed between 2 and 4 years after landing because of the staggered dates of return. The postﬂight vBMD and aBMD
measurements were normalized to the preﬂight BMD (the y—axis) and plotted as a function of days after landing (the X—axis) when the scans were
performed. The postﬂight DXA measurement of aBMD ofthe lumbar spine (L1—L4) increased in all 8 astronauts and continued to increase or stabilize over
the next 2 to 4 years (A), whereas the QCT measurement of vBMD in the trabecular compartment of the lumbar spine (L1 and L2) increased in 2 of 8
astronauts during the ﬁrst year of reambulation on Earth (B). After the ﬁrst year, trabecular vBMD declined or stabilized (some at a level below baseline
measurement) in 6 of 8 astronauts. For the femoral neck (C), the DXA measurement of aBMD for 2 astronauts exceeded or returned to the preﬂight
measurement during the postﬂight monitoring period, whereas in 1 of these same astronauts, the QCT measurement of vBMD in the trabecular
compartment (D) declined over the same time period (Reprinted from Carpenter RD, LeBlanc AD, Evans H, Sibonga JD, Lang TF. Long—term changes in the
density and structure of the human hip and spine after long—duration spaceﬂight. Acta Astronautica. 2010;67:71—81, with permission from ElsevierQ”).
resorption, without an increase in bone formation, could be In the few ARED users in which data have been obtained (Fig. 2),
expected to yield net loss of bone mass. the average monthly loss in aBMD (n = 8) was reduced to 0.47%
. . i 0.530/ rou mean i SD at the total hi with an avera e
In—flight countermeasure evaluations o (g. p ) p , 9
monthly gain of 0.30% i 0.94% at the lumbar spine—compared
Resistive exercise is the only countermeasure routinely used to with monthly losses of 1.1%i 0.45% (total hip) and 0.71%
mitigate bone loss in all long-duration astronauts. The ARED i 0.51% (lumbar spine) in aBMD with use of the iRED (n = 24). In
(Fig. 3A) was ﬂown to the ISS in December 2008 to supplement next paragraph, the interpretation of this apparent change is
the iRED (Fig. 33), along with the cycle ergometer and treadmill confounded by the use of bisphosphonates in 3 ofthe astronauts
exercise hardware that have also been used in ﬂight since 2000. during the period of ARED availability.
Table 3. Hip Bone Strength from Finite Element Models of OCT Data From 11 Long-Duration Astronauts Before (Preﬂight) and
Immediately After (Postﬂight) ISS Missions
Loading condition Preflight Postflight p Loss in hip strength (%/month)
Stance 13,200 :l: 300 N 1 1,200 :l: 2400 N 0.001 2.2
Fall 2,580 :l: 560 N 2,280 :l: 590 N 0.003 1.9
Hip strength (force to failure, in Newtons [N]) is estimated for two loading orientations from ﬁnite element models of OCT scans. All values are group
means i SD for ISS astronauts (n =11).Average calculated monthly loss in hip strength was calculated from total percentage loss over mission divided by
total months of spaceﬂight?” Immediate postﬂight QCT scans after ISS missions were performed within 1 month of landing due to travel to site of
preﬂight QCT scanner.
OCT 2 quantitative computed tomography; ISS = International Space Station.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG-DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1249 I

"
"8","0-01 The study was approved for testing in astronauts, with a planned
0 O statistical comparison to 16 historical controls.“7'18) However,
g _0_02 _0_015 _0_01 . _0_005 only alendronate has been offered to US. astronauts because of
E O _0.01 NASA’s concern about the limited safety data for zoledronic acid
5 O O 0 relative to alendronate. Participants in the bisphosphonate ﬂight
m 0 Q OStance . . .
U:- O O . -0.02 study also had access to ARED for reSIstIve exerCIse, whereas the
'3 0 O O O 0 Fa” historical controls did not. Thus, the attenuated postﬂight aBMD
g 0 . O ""0‘03 loss detected in ARED users will be confounded by the
6 O . . _0 04 antiresorptive effects of alendronate in the exercising astronauts.
. The data from this bisphosphonate trial are not available for
o -0.05 presentation here as the study is ongoing.
-o.06 Bone Summit Panel Recommendations
Change in DXA Total Femur Areal BMD —
, _ _ _ _ Overall assessment
Fig. 6. Spaceﬂight—Induced changes of hip bone strength In ISS
astronauts. Hip bone strength of ISS astronauts before and after Long-duration astronauts can experience 10% to 15% aBMD
SpaceﬂigbtWaS assessed by preﬂightand bOStﬂigbtscanS OfbibS by bOtb decline during a spaceﬂight mission and still meet NASA
DXA and QCT. FE models onCT data estimated hip bone strength fortwo standards for bone health. In the panel’s opinion, interventions
loading scenarios (singIe—Iegged stance and posterolateral fall) whereas to mitigate bone loss during spaceﬂight are advisable for long-
h'p {aBMD represents_the wIdely‘appl'edéurrOgate for bone Strength'Th_e duration astronauts, in order to minimize riskfor adverse skeletal
y—aXIs IS the change In hip strength estimated by FEM and the X—aXIs IS , , ,
. . effects later In life. However, because the Iong-term adaptation
change In aBMD as a DXA—measured surrogate for hip bone strength. fb h | b | d . II b f
There was poor correlation (stance: R2=O.23; fall: R2=O.OS) between 0 one to space as on y. een eva uate m a sma nurh er 0
these two methods for assessing changes, suggesting that QCTand FEM astronauts, the panel conSIders the available data InsufﬁCIent to
detect changes in hip bone strength due to spaceﬂight that are not conﬁdently recommend a speCIﬁc therapeutic course 0f action.
captured by DXA aBMD (Adapted from Keyak and colleagues(22)). Additional WEll-dESiQHEd studies are warranted.
Measures of bone structure (such as trabecular microarchi-
Pharmacologic measures are also being considered to counter tecture, who|e—bone geometry, and 3D mass distributions in
ﬂight—related bone loss. To this end, bisphosphonate therapy cortical and trabecular compartments) are key determinants of
during spaceﬂight is being studied in ajoint experiment by NASA bone strength(24) that could be uniquely affected by weightless-
and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA).The study is ness and may not be sufﬁciently accounted for by DXA
testing bisphosphonates (alendronate or zoledronic acid) to technology. The data (reviewed at the Summit) suggest QCT—
prevent loss of bone mass, structure, and strength at the hip, based measures may provide distinct information about bone
quantiﬁed by DXA, QCT, and FEM, in Iong-duration astronauts. health in astronauts. The speciﬁcs ofthese changes and how they
150 20
125
'5‘ 15
m 100 A
C _l
m \
.: 75 3
j a 10
o\ 50 <
; (D
+- 25 m 5
Z
0 ------------- -- -0
-25 0
K. K.
0“ '5"" “.9 6° ,3? ,3? :9 ’39 «$0 «$0 0 (1' ®'\ «a 6‘0
ses<°<°§°oo¢<2~ \\\\““x'\~
Q Q 1‘ 1‘ <9 «9 <2~ 5' v
Q ‘2 \4, \0 \0
ﬂ 9 o
Q5"" 6‘ 6‘
\I \I
Fig. 7. Bone remodeling during spaceﬂight assessed by biomarkers of bone turnover. Changes in bone turnover biomarkers, measured in urine and blood
obtained before, during, and after spaceﬂight, are used to reﬂect cumulative changes in bone cell activities. N—telopeptide (NTX) (n = 11) in urine (%
change from preﬂight measure) and bone—speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase (BSAP, U/L) (n =6) produced in circulation by osteoblasts were measured in
crewmembers on the Mir spacecraft and the ISS. Biomarkers highlight the uncoupling of bone remodeling during spaceﬂight. Bone resorption was
elevated early and persisted throughout spaceﬂight, whereas bone formation was unresponsive to the stimulation of bone resorption, resulting in net
bone loss. The vertical lines denote the temporal separation of in—ﬂight from postﬂight samples (Adapted from Smith and colleagues(23)). FD# = number of
ﬂight days into the mission; R +# = number of days after return to Earth.
I 1250 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"9","inﬂuence the fracture risk of an astronaut with reloading are not cortical bone will likely overwhelm the aBMD measure and mask
well understood. Moreover, if spaceﬂight-induced changes quantitatively less impressive but biomechanically important
persist, then they could combine with later age-related changes effects in trabecular bone. Although not fully understood, other
and prematurely increase fracture risk later in life. Thus, the indices of bone structure (such as trabecular microarchitecture,
impact of space-induced skeletal changes on hip strength wi|| who|e-bone geometry and cross-sectional dimensions, and
remain an open issue for NASA until structural indices of bone in cortical bone width) are recognized determinants of bone
Iong-duration astronauts, such as those acquired with QCT, can strength, but are poorly measured with DXA.(24'25) The available
be seria||y evaluated. astronaut data suggest that spaceﬂight may result in a unique
A resolution of the relative merits of aBMD versus QCT form of bone loss with structural implications not adequately
measures in this situation is hampered by novel constraints, assessed by aBMD measures. Data from both QCT and DXA
including understudied exposure variables (spaceﬂight), sma|| indicate that skeletal changes caused by spaceﬂight are speciﬁc
numbers of affected individuals, and variation in subject to skeletal regions and to bone compartments.(4'“'26) Moreover,
characteristics (age, training, ﬂight duration, and ﬂight con- there is a precipitous rate ofaBMD decline in crewmembers(4'“)
ditions).Nevertheless, the potentialvalue ofadditional measures that may be due in part to the aggressive osteoclast activity
should not be ignored. Hence, the panel recommends that all inferred from i|iac crest biopsies of skeletaIIy-unloaded bed rest
Iong-duration astronauts be evaluated for spaceﬂight-induced subjects.(27‘29) Bone turnover markers suggest uncoupled bone
changes in separate compartments of the hip (total, femoral remodelingduring spaceﬂight,(23)acondition that could resultin
neck, and trochanter) by conducting preﬂight and postﬂight the formation of stress risers in trabecular bone.(3°) Similarly
QCT—based measures. Also, the panel recommends that QCT accelerated losses in postmenopausal women can result in
measures be incorporated in a surveillance program and the microarchitecturaldisruptions and increased fractures,especia||y
evaluation of astronaut eligibility and that efforts to better at central skeletal sites.(3” The failure of hip trabecular vBMD to
understand the appropriate role of OCT measures should be return to preﬂight values by 2 years after return is of concern?”
ongoing. The heterogeneous changes in the spine with aging, especially since deﬁcits in trabecular vBMD of the femoral neck
however, are problematic and a surveillance regimen for the were reported to predict hip fracture independent of aBMD in
spine cannot be recommended at this time beyond monitoring elderly men.(25) Thus, the space-induced changes in bone quality
BMD and vertebral fracture assessments with DXA. However, could put an astronaut at a higher fracture risk than the average
new technologies and analyses should be explored in research Earth-based person with the same aBMD. The persistent
studies to generate data forthe panel’sreviewin the nearfuture. structural deﬁcits after spaceﬂight also could be further
Based upon its review of trends in astronaut data and worsened by changes induced by a second ﬂight as well as by
individual case reports, the Bone Summit Panel offered the aging or other risk factors.(21'32)
following recommendations for bone health management in Although the exact contribution of trabecular bone loss or
Iong-duration astronauts: (1) expand the characterization of structural change on hip strength requires further deﬁnition, the
spaceﬂight changes to include QCT of the hip for risk absence of recovery—to-baseline measurements in trabecular
surveillance, (2) investigate the impact of spaceﬂight on hip bone indicates irreversible changes in strength have probably
bone strength with the use of FEM, and (3) modify current risk occurred. Therefore, it could be clinically meaningful to
mitigation approaches before, during, and after spaceﬂight to implement QCT hip scans to assess the efﬁcacy of new in-ﬂight
optimize effectiveness. countermeasures and for surveillance postﬂight, in which an
QCT for risk surveillance absence of recovery could be a trigger to review bone health risk
factors and/or to consnder Intervention to prevent expected age-
The sole reliance on DXA to assess spaceﬂight effects and related boneloss.The speciﬁc changes to bone microarchitecture
countermeasure efﬁcacy may provide inadequate information to (eg, trabecular thickness, trabecular separation, connectivity, etc.)
NASA decision-makers. Although aBMD as measured by DXA and their impact on strength and fracture risk will require further
may be a robust predictor for osteoporosis-related fractures in research since QCT does not detect trabecular microarchitectural
the general population, it may be insufﬁcient for understanding changes.
fracture risk in astronauts. First, the astronaut population is It is recognized that a recommendation based on an
physically ﬁt but exposed to novel environmental conditions and established relationship between QCT—based measures and
mission activities in microgravity that may have unique effects fracture risk is a standard that is impossible to meet considering
on bone.Standard aBMD-based clinical guidelines for monitor- the limited data available on astronauts. Nevertheless, the
ing fracture risk and assessing therapeutic efﬁcacy are derived uncertainties associated with the assessment of bone character
from terrestrial populations that are generally older and with with aBMD in astronauts suggest that more sensitive and
conventional clinical risk factors (eg, menopause, rheumatoid innovative approaches may be required for longer-term
arthritis, glucocorticoid treatment,fa||s, etc.). surveillance. It is recommended that measurement of bone
Second, aBMD measures may not adequately detect the structure and of separate bone compartments using QCT should
unique changesinduced byspaceﬂight and postﬂightreloading. be instituted. With the end of the Space Shuttle program,
DXA, for example, cannot distinguish cortical restructuring (ie, launches and landings of crew transport systems would occur in
modeling) that has occurred as the result of spaceﬂight, that Russia; thus, the panel recommended that QCT measures be
could occur with exercise loading of bones during spaceﬂight, or conducted in the United States as close as possible to launch and
could occur after return to Earth’s gravity.“8) An increase in landing dates.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG-DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1251 I

"
"10","FEM for estimations of hip bone strength bones strong enough to perform mechanicaIIy-Ioaded tasks on a
. . . . . . . mission, to return to reﬂi ht activities on Earth, or to
The collective eVIdence from spaceﬂights raises the pOSSIbIIIty p g
. . . accommodate age-related bone loss?
that prolonged space habitation affects the skeleton In such a . . .
. . . Given the constraints of low subject numbers and slow data
way that declines In mechanical strength may not be detected by . . .
. . . (1721 22) . achISItIon, attempts should be made to use the most powerful
current clinical technologies. ' ' Computation of QCT—FEM , , , ,
. . . research technologies and analyses available to Identify
strength can complement the eXIstIng medical assessment tests . ,
. astronauts who may be at risk for developing premature
(DXA and bone turnover markers) and the more conventional . . . .
. . . . osteoporOSIs. Thus, It IS recommended that NASA evaluate hip
QCT structural Indices. In ISS astronauts, declines In bone . . .
, , , , , strength wnth QCT—derived FEM estimates as a new surrogate to
strength, estimated by FEM, are eVIdent after spaceﬂight, In spite . . . . .
, , , . . assess fracture risk followmg long-duration spaceﬂight. Addl-
of the pristine medical history and extreme phySIcaI ﬁtness ofthe . . . . .
. . (22) . . . tional results are accumulating from ongomg terrestrial studies,
typical astronaut before spaceﬂight. Emerging data Indicate . . . . .
, , which wnll help to Inform the Interpretation of astronaut data.
that FEM estimates of hip strength may be related to fracture
. (33_35) . . . . . .
risk, espeCIaIIy In combination With aBMD. FEM estimates of Risk mitigation approaches
hip failure load quantify the ability of the hip to resist fracture for
a speciﬁc load vector. This index may be the single best existing
composite assessment of bone strength because of its ability to Preﬂight 59/9070” and certiﬁcation standards
integrate applied loads with geometry and distribution of . The NASA Space Flight Human System Standardshhestablish
material propertnes(3(6l?MD, elastic modulus, and yield strength) 'h ranges of crew hea|th required to minimize risks to health
3D bone structure. Although there are no data to Indicate that and performance during spaceﬂight missions. Consequently,
FEM estimation 0f strength '5 an Improved Index combazeg to these medical standards—for selecting applicants for astro-
aBMD, the use Of multiple determinants 0f bone strength by naut candidacy, for certifying an astronaut for a spaceﬂight
FEM, In conjunction With the snngle aBMD surrogate for bone mission, or for disqualifying an astronaut from a second
strength, may enhance the assessment of fracture probability In spaceﬂight mission—could be used to protect those
each astronaut for IndIVIduaIIzed clinical deCISIons. Finally, data astronauts who are at greater risk for losing bone strength
from QCT and FEM strength modeling can be used to optimize a during spaceﬂight that would put them at increased fracture
probabilistic fracture model, developed by NASAE3E? calculate risk with subsequent aging. The current standards are based
applied loads to bones and fracture probability. This, and upon aBMD by DXA, which may not capture all parameters of
other modeling efforts, could be used for estimating fracture risk bone strength and fracture risk. Therefore, NASA should
during exploration mISSIons on planets or asterOIds, monitoring expand the use Of QCT—based FEM estimates of hip strength
risk during return to normal actIVItIes on Earth, and for as a selection standard for bone health. The growing
understanding the combined effects 0f two Iong—duration literature linking FEM measures of strength to fracture
mnssnons or 0f spaceﬂight changes W'th the expected age— probability provides a basis for the practical application of
related changes. As surveillance data accumulate for the these measures in astronauts.
astronaut population, recommendations for future extended
missions beyond |ow Earth orbit should be formulated or ,
. ln-ﬂight countermeasures
modiﬁed.

The possibility of |ow-trauma postﬂight fractures is a critical 0 NASA cannot validate any single in-ﬂight mitigation strategy
driver for assessment and appropriate intervention. The as long as multiple bone-Ioss countermeasures are applied in
combination of space effects with postﬂight aging may individual astronauts.
predispose long-duration astronauts to fragility fractures at an 0 There is limited information about side effects of pharma-
ear|ier age on Earth. FEM has been applied to QCT scans from ceutical agents under weightless conditions. Thus, NASA
aging population cohorts, in which FEM—estimated hip strength should continue to focus on management strategies of
is associated with incident hip fractures.(33'34) Such modeling modiﬁable risk factors for bone loss (by exercise and dietary
could also be used to direct bone rehabilitation efforts after manipulations) as the standard methods for bone loss
astronauts return to Earth, to avoid the risk of overloading bones, prevention during ISS missions before using Earth-based
especially with exercise. The translation of OCT data to FEM pharmaceutical interventions. This recommendation may be
strength provides an individualized functional index at the hip reﬁned in the future as accumulated data, and research on
for each astronaut. From the occupational risk perspective, bone emerging pharmaceuticals, are reviewed.
medical standards based on QCT data and FEM estimation of hip o The limited, ﬂight data for a|endronate are encouraging and
fracture loads could provide NASA with the clinical practice suggest that treatment may mitigate hip bone loss during
guidelines needed for advising astronauts against physical ﬂight.(38) However, the onset of the a|endronate study
activities with high impact loads to the hip. These data may coincides with the implementation of new ARED hardware;
provide the basis for developing new medical standards to therefore, it is not possible to distinguish the contribution of
supplement the current aBMD-based standards. This translation each intervention on the prevention of aBMD loss or the
—from measured surrogates for bone strength to calculated underlying structural changes. Studies are required to
estimates of bone strength—could add conﬁdence when compare intervention by combined a|endronate and ARED
addressing important issues. Are an individual astronaut’s hip exercise with intervention by only the ARED exercise.

I 1252 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"11","o If an on—orbit pharmaceutical intervention is deemed Summary Of Recommendations
necessary for longer missions, then the panel suggested —
zoledronic acid be considered for the in—ﬂight experiment Recommendation 1
based 0h two major considerations: (1) a single intravenous Given the few numbers affected and the unique nature of the
(IV) infusion 0f zoledronic acid may be preferred to weekly problem, the adverse effects of spaceﬂight on the skeleton can
oral a|endronate, or other oral bisphosphonates available, be considered a form of rare syndrome. In light of the current
because of the association of oral bisphosphonates with understanding of its pathophysiology and the preliminary data
adverse upper gastrointestinal effects and the knowledge available, the adoption of novel assessment methods (eg, QCT,
gaps related to esophageal adhesiveness and pill dissolution FEM) is appropriate.
ih the microgravity environment, and (2) the preﬂight Although useful, the current aBMD-based fracture standards
administration Of an IV bisphosphonate WOUId enable ﬂight for risk assessment (originally developed in older women) are
surgeons to address any side effects while astronauts are 5h” probably not sufﬁcient for assessing risk in astronauts. Preﬂight
0h Earth. and postﬂight QCT hip scans should be collected on astronauts
' Denosumab may be useful, but Iong-term clinical data are to evaluate the impact of spaceﬂight on structural determinants
0th hOW emerging and are needed to identify possible IOW' of bone strength. FEM estimates of hip strength, as performed in
frequency adverse events. terrestrial population studies, should be analyzed to derive hip
' Teriparatide might be effective forcrewmembers who do not strength cutoffs as new medical standards for bone health in
regain BMD With conventional treatments over an extended astronauts; eg, to qualify astronauts for Iong-duration spaceﬂight
postﬂight period. and to evaluate applicants for the astronaut corps.
o All agents being considered for ﬂight may require appropri—
ate testing, including in ground-based spaceﬂight analogs, Recommendation 2
before undertaking trials in astronauts.
c There is some concern for in-ﬂight stress fractures and AS QCT—based assessments Of bone health are reﬁned, .the
. . . . current use of aBMD measures for preﬂight and postﬂight
fractures that may occur during In-ﬂight exercnse on the new . . .
. assessments should continue. DXA generates minimal cumula—
ARED exercnse hardware. , . . . . .
. QCT testing should be part of the evaluation of the efﬁcacy of tive radiation exposure anelenables Simultaneous monitenng bf
. . . . . changes In body composmon. Moreover, DXA monitoring Will
all In—ﬂight countermeasures to mitigate or prevent losses In , , ,
hip trabecular vBMD. add. to the available, historical elataset on astronauts and
0 Because the impact of changes to the trabecular microstruc- additional aBMD qata collected In parallel W'th new QCT
ture ofthe hip is not known and may be irreversible.(39) NASA measures Will eonSIderably add to. the understanding of bone
should help continue to develop technologies that can be change , assocnated W'th spaceﬂight, the development. 0f
used to understand changes in trabecular microarchitecture appropriate countermeasures, and the assessment Of postﬂight
. . . . bone health.
at Sites In the hip and spine of astronauts.
Recommendation 3
Postﬂight surveillance For ISS missions, NASA should focus on reducing known
0 Continued use of DXA for risk surveillance is recommended modiﬁable risk factors for bone loss, such as reduced physical
for astronauts because of the abundance of aBMD data from activity and suboptimal nutrition.
terrestrial populations as reference cohorts for aging effects.
0 Decisions regarding spaceﬂight-induced skeletal loss, for Recommendation 4
both clinical care and subsequent ﬂight certiﬁcations, ShOUId The use of pharmacological interventions is of interest to reduce
not rely solely 0h measures performed using DXA' A5 QCT spaceﬂight—associated bone loss, especially for spaceﬂights of
measures become available 0h individual astronauts, they longer durations. The design of future studies on the utility of
ShOUId be incorporated into the postﬂight clinical evaluation such interventions should be carefully considered to ensure clear
of skeletal status. outcomes.
An osteoporosis specialist should evaluate astronauts for
treatable risk factors if his/her DXA postﬂight aBMD T—score is
less than —2.0 or if hip QCT results do not recover to preﬂight Disclosures
values (within LSC of preﬂight measure) by 2 years after —
return. Although ﬂight-induced loss of vertebral strength should EO has received consultancy fees, grant/research support, and/or
not be ignored in future studies (for instance with QCT), the has served on advisory boards for Amgen, Merck & Co, and Eli
astronauts are now of an age at which some osteophytic Lilly; E0 was also a member on NASA’s Research on Human
change is conceivable, and, since extravertebral mineralization Health Risks, Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. RA
may obscure aBMD change in the spine, the primary measure- has received consultancy fees and grant/research support from
ment site should be the hip. Vertebral fracture assessment Amgen and/or Eli Lilly. SA has received consultancy fees and
(VFA) is a recent addition to medically required DXA scans and serves on an advisory board for Merck & Co. and has received
should continue to be conducted in all astronauts during DXA grant/research support from NASA Human Research Program.
tests. NB has received consultancy fees and/or received grant/research
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG-DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1253 I

"
"12","Support from Amgen, Merck& C0"" and Eli Lilly. EML has received 8. Payne MWC, William DR, TI'UCIEI G. Space ﬂight rGhabIIItationI
grant/research support, served on advisory boards and/or served I'terature rev'ew' Am J Phys Med Rehab'l' 2007;86(1):1_9'
on a Speakers Bureau for Amgen, Eli Lilly, Merck & C0, and 9. Whedon GD, Lutvt/ak L, Rambaut P, Whittle M, Leach C Reid J, Smith
Novartis SP has served on a S eakers Bureau for Am en and is M. Effect of weightlessness on mineral metabolism; metabolic
' . p . 9 studies on Skylab orbital spaceflights. Calcif Tissue Res. 1976;21
employed as a bone denSItometry and endocrine consultant to (Suppl):423—30.
NASA-Johnson Space Center. NW has received honoraria, 10. Rambaut PC, Johnston RS. Prolonged weightlessness and calcium
consultancy fees and/or grant/research support from Amgen, loss in man, Acta Astronaut, 1979;6(9):1113—22.
Eli Lilly, Novartis,and Merck&Co.A|l other authors state that they 11, LeBlanc A, Schneider v, Shackelford L, West 5, Oganov V, Bakulin
have no conﬂicts of interest. A, Voronin L. Bone mineral and lean tissue loss after long—
duration spaceflight. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact. 2000;1(2):
Acknowledgments 157—60'
— 12. U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Basic Program
, , , , , , Elements for Federal Employee Occupational Safety and Health
AppreCIatIon IS exteneled to Dr.Angelo A. Licata (Clevelanoi Clinic, Programs, 29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1960 (1995).
Center for Space Med'c'he) and Dr. S-V- Reddy (Medical UniverSIty Washington, DC: US. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and
of South Carolina) for theirthoughtful review of this manuscript Health Administration [cited 2013 Apr 7]. Available from: http://
and to Dr. Jane Krauhs and Dr. Kathleen MCMonigaI, MD (both of www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owastand.display_standard_group?
Johnson Space Center) for their editorial assistance. In addition, p—tOC—Ievelm&p—part—numberV41960'
authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Scott M. 13' Eational AteronatUt'C; adndWSpﬁee fdmsrgsgation (IUAS). Spas: ﬂ'ghdt
. uman sys em 5 an ar . as mg on : a iona eronau ICS an
Smith: Dr. Sara R' Zwart, Dr. Andrea M Hanson! Dr. Harlan Evans, Space Administration (US); 2007. (NASA publication; no. NASA—STD—
Ms. Elisabeth R. Spector, and Ms. Adriana Babiak—Vazquez (all of 3001). Vol 1. Crew health.
Johnson Space Center), Dr.Adrian D. LeBlanc (Universities Space 14. Smith SM, Heer MA, Shackelford L, Sibonga JD, PIoutz—Snyder L,
Research ASSOCIatIon), Dr. Thomas F. Lang (UniverSIty of Zwart SR. Benefits for bone from resistance exercise and nutrition in
California at San Francisco), and Dr. Joyce H, Keyak (University Iong—duration spaceflight: evidence from biochemistry and densi—
of California at Irvine) for the presentations of astronaut data in tomEtW J Bone “Amer Res' 2012279114 1'
this review. The Bone Summit activity was funded by Human 15. Sibon.ga JD, Evans HJ, Sung HG, Spector ER, Lang TF, OganoY vs,
Adaptation and Countermeasures Division at NASA Johnson 13aku|m AV’ ShaCkelford LC’ LeBlanc AD' Recovery Of Space“""9_ht'
S C Induced bone loss: bone mineral denSIty after Iong—duration
pace enter. missions as fitted with an exponential function. Bone. 2007;41(6):
Authors’ roles: JS convened the Bone Summit Panel, devel- 973—8.
Oped the Charge to the panel, drafted the manuscript and was 16. NIH. Consensus Development Panel on Osteoporosis Prevention,
responsible for the integrity of the data presented herein. EO Diagnosis and Therapy. JAMA. 2001;285(6):785—95.
provided extensive manuscript revision. EO and SA provided 17. Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Genant H, Yu A. Cortical and
guidance to JS on the relevant astronaut data to review and trabecular bone mineral loss from the Spine and hip in long-
facilitated discussion sessions at the Bone Summit. The Bone durat'on Spaceﬂ'ght'J Bone Mmer Re5°2004;19(6)11006'12'
Summit Panel (EO, RA, SA, NB, ML, SP, ss, MS, and NW) provided 18' tang TF, LEBI'ancl All), Evans fHJI LI“ Y. :daptat'on offtlhehprfgma'
. . emur to s eeta re 0a ing a ter ong— uration space ig t. one
the Interpretation of. the astronaut data, formulated the Miner Res. 2006;21(8):1224—30.
recommendations, reVIsed the manuscript content and ap- _ _
d h ﬁ | , f h , 19. Riggs BL, Melton LJ 3rd, Robb RA, Camp JJ, Atkinson EJ, Peterson
prove t e na verSIon 0 t e manuscript. JM, Rouleau PA, McCollough CH, Bouxsein ML, Khosla 5. Population—
based study of age and sex differences in bone volumetric density,
R f size, geometry, and structure at different skeletal sites. J Bone Miner
e erences Res. 2004;19(12):1945—54.
1. LeBlanc A,Shacke|ford L,SchneiderV. Future human bone research 20' Sukumar D’ Ambia—Sobhan A’ Zurfluh R’_ Schlussel. Y’ Stahl TJ’
. . _ Gordon CL, Shapses SA. Areal and volumetric bone mineral denSIty
In space. Bone. 1998,22(5).1135—65. _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ and geometry at two levels of protein Intake during caloric
2' Adams GR' Caiozzo VJ' Baldwm KM' Skeletal muscle unweighting: restriction: a randomized, controlled trial. J Bone Miner Res.
spaceflight and ground—based models. J Appl Physiol. 2011'26(6):1339—48.
2003;95:2185—201 . .
_ _ _ _ 21. Carpenter RD, LeBlanc AD, Evans H, Sibonga JD, Lang TF. Long-term
3. Cavanagh PR, Licata AA, Rice AJ. .ExerCIse and Pharmacological changes in the density and structure of the human hip and spine
countermeasures for bone loss during Iong—duration space ﬂ'ght' after Iong—duration spaceflight. Acta Astronautica. 2010;67:71—81.
Gravit Space Biol Bull. 2005;18(2):39—58. _ _
_ 22. Keyak JH, Koyama AK, LeBlanc A, Lu Y, Lang TF. Reduction In
4' LeBlane AD, Spector ER' Evans HJ' Sibonga JD' S|.<e|eta| responses to proximal femoral strength due to Iong—duration spaceflight. Bone.
spaceflight and the bed rest analog: a reVIew. Musculoskelet 2009.44(3):449_53.
Neuronal Interact. 2007;7(1):33—47. _ , _ _
23. Smith SM, Wastney ME, O Brien KO, Morukov BV, Larina LM, Abrams
5. Zwart SR, Smith SM. Impact of space flight on the human skeletal SE Davis—Street JE Oganov V Shackelford LC. Bone markers
system and potential nutritional countermeasures. Int SportMed J' calcium metabolism, and calcium kinetics during extended—duration
2005;41199—214' space flight on the Mir space station. J Bone Miner Res. 2005;20(2):
6. Pietrzyk RA, Jones JA, Sams CF, Whitson PA. Renal stone formation 208—18,
among astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med. 200778“ Suppl):A9— 24. Melton LJ 3rd, Riggs BL, Keaveny TM, Achenbach SJ, Hoffmann PF,
13' Camp JJ, Rouleau PA, Bouxsein ML, Amin S, Atkinson EJ, Robb RA,
7. Smith SM, Zwart SR. Nutritional biochemistry of spaceflight. Adv Khosla 5. Structural determinants of vertebral fracture risk.J Bone
Clin Chem. 2008;46:87—13. Miner Res. 2007;22(12):1885—92.
I 1254 ORWOLL ET AL. Journal Of Bone and Mineral Research

"
"13","25. Black DM,Bouxsein ML,Marsha|| LM,Cummings SR,Lang TF,Cau|ey of bone loss at multiple skeletal sites: evidence for substantial
JA, Ensrud KE, Nielson CM, Orwoll ES. Osteoporotic Fractures in Men trabecular bone loss in young adult women and men.J Bone Miner
(Mr. OS) Research Group. Proximal femoral structure and the Res. 2008;23(2):205—14.
prediction 0f hip fracture in men: a large prospective study using 33. Keyak JH, Sigurdsson S, Karlsdottir G, Oskarsdottir D, Sigmarsdottir
QCT-J Bone Miner Res. 2008?23(8)11326‘33° A, Zhao S, Kornak J, Harris TB, Sigurdsson G, Jonsson BY,

26. Vico L, Collet P, Guignandon A, Lafage-Proust MH, Thomas T, Siggeirsdottir K, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason V, Lang TR. MaIe—female
Rehailia M, Alexandre C. Effects of Iong—term microgravity exposure differences in prediction of hip fracture during finite element
on cancellous and cortical weight—bearing bones of cosmonauts. analysis. Bone. 2011;48(6):1239—45.

Lancet. 2000355116074 1° 34. Orwoll ES, Marshall LM, Nielson CM, Cummings SR, Lapidus J, Cauley

27. Vico L, Chappard D, Alexandre C, Palle S, Minaire P, Riffat G, JA, Ensrud K, Lane N, Hoffmann PR, Kopperdahl DL, Keaveny TM.
Morukov B, Rakhmanov 5. Effects of a 120 day period of bed—rest on Osteoporotic Fractures in Med Study Group. Finite element analysis
bone mass and bone cell activities in man: attempts at counter— of the proximal femur and hip fracture risk in older men. J Bone
measure. Bone Miner. 1987;2(5):383—94. Miner Res. 2009;24(3):475—83.

28. Thomsen JS, Morukov BV, Vico L, Alexandre C, Saparin PI, Gowin W. 35. Keaveny TM, Kopperdahl DL, Melton LJ 3rd, Hoffmann PF, Amin
Cancellous bone structure of iliac crest biopsies following 370 days S, Riggs BL, Khosla S. Age—dependence of femoral strength in white
of head—down bed rest. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2005;76(10): women and men.J Bone Miner Res. 2010;25(5):994—1001.
915—22 36. Keyak JH, Kaneko TS, Tehranzadeh J, Skinner HB. Predicting

29. Zerwekh JE, Ruml LA, Gottschalk F, Pak CY. The effects of twelve proximal femoral strength using structural engineering models.
weeks of bed rest on bone histology, biochemical markers of bone Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2005;437:219—28.
turnover, and calcium homeostasis in eleven normal subjects. J 37. Nelson ES, Lewandowski B, Licata A, Myers JG. Development and
Bone Miner Res. 1998?13(10)31594‘601- validation of a predictive bone fracture risk model for astronauts.

30. Van der Linden JC, Homminga J, Verhaar J, Weinans H. Mechanical Ann Biomed Eng. 2009;37(11):2337—59.
consequences of bone loss in cancellous bone. J Bone Miner Res. 38. Leblanc A, Matsumoto T, Jones J, Shapiro J, Lang T, Shackelford L,
2001?16(3)1457‘65° Smith SM, Evans H, Spector E, PIoutz—Snyder R, Sibonga J, Keyak J,

31. Kleerekoper M, Villanueva AR, Stanciu J, Rao DS, Parfitt AM. The role Nakamura T, Kohri K, Ohshima H. Bisphosphonates as a supplement to
of three—dimensional trabecular microstructure in the pathogenesis exercise to protect bone during Iong—duration spaceflight. Osteoporos
of vertebral compression fractures. Calcif Tissue Int. 1985;37:594—7. Int. Epub. 2013 Jan 19. DOI:10.1007/sOO198—O12—2243—z

32. Riggs BL, Melton LJ 3rd, Robb RA, Camp JJ, Atkinson EJ, McDaniel L, 39. Parfitt AM. Trabecular bone architecture in the pathogenesis and
Amin S, Rouleau PA, Khosla S. Population—based assessment of rates prevention of fracture. Am J Med. 1987;82(1B):68—72.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research SKELETAL HEALTH IN LONG-DURATION ASTRONAUTS 1255 I

"
