"","x"
"1","' . Linda Hall Acct #010511 —- NASA JohnsonSpacecenter - ' * Q (1/41 _
' 5 ‘ . - ‘ 5;“ '5 5 . x; I .
I’d like to request the following papers. "" I

0 Jones, Scott B., Dam Or, Gall E.B1_‘1§1gham, and Robert C. Morrow, ORZS.‘ Optzmzzatzon .c
ofRoot Zone SubstratesforgMicrogravim (Warrendale, PA: SAE International, J uly

2002) 2002-01-2380 = ‘ I U

. ' 5:35;: i_""*""*3ii?§jzaz:£é =’{flf3'i-t‘ﬁ3t5r5 ""' ‘ '
Christa George -, 5 1};
Supervisor, Scientiﬁc & Technical Info. Ceﬁta‘f’le-fAil‘Siiixg‘ii/i’ijéhn‘Son Space Center - g ?-

DB Consulting | ITAMS 5

2101 NASA Parkway Mail Code 1823 Houston, =TX55-770558—3696 U ' .
281-483—2491 (Phone) [281—244—6624 (Fax) r 5
christageorpe—lgagnasagov ’ I ' N I > .

' .zmwc. .5.:m.’,-.-.'.- A3114.” g-QWJA. \ ~ - .5 ”Mm Cmﬁw’»‘m

"
"2","2002-01 -2380
? ORZS: Optimization of Root Zone Substrates for Micrograwty
Scott B. Jones and Dani Or
7 Utah State University
Gail E. Bingham
Space Dynamics Laboratory
Robert C. Morrow
Orbital Technologies Corporation
Copyright © 2002 Society of Automotive Engineers, inc.
ABSTRACT the theoretical models required for a wider range of
reduced gravity plant experiments. ORZS is completing
- The ORZS ﬂight experiment is designed to measure gas its Experiment Deﬁnition Phase, and is being designed
diffusion through plant growth substrates at varying 85 a locker style payload. The ORZS experiment
water content levels in microgravity. This information is module can be hosted by the ""UM handling 83'“
critical for preper water management and the prevention management experiment (FHAME) controller being
of root zone hypoxia during plant growth and advanced developed by ORB'TEC- 'nC- 0"" by the LADA (P'f-jmt
life support (ALS) biomass production experiments. QTOWth facility) controller developed by Space Dynamics
Microgravity data that suggest enhanced hysteresis in Laboratory (50L) for '33
water retention may alter the gas diffusion process.
changing the optimum root zone moisture control set The objectives of this research project are to 5) design
point in pg plant growth systems. Small gas diffusion and test a gas diffusion measurement device amenable
"" cells are being evaluated as measurement systems for to evaluating 935 diffusion ""1 ‘coarse' textured (0-5 t0 2
coarse—textured plant growth media at 19 and 09. mm) growth media am and in us. ii) determine oxygen
Design guidelines aim to minimize gravitational force diffusion COBfﬁCientS in plant QVOWth media 35 a function
while maintaining a representative porous medium. of water content at 19 for eventual comparison to
Substrate physical properties (e.g.. water retention) pose measurements at 09-
additional complications for diffusion coefﬁcient
determination. Results of this study will directly support THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
substrate selection and management for International
Space Station (ISS) plant growth experiments. SUBSTRATE WATER RETENTION
INTRODUCTION The water retention characteristic of a porous medium is
directly related to gas diffusion within a substrate
Plants require adequate water and oxygen supply because they can both be tied to the air—ﬁlled porosity.
(inversely related processes) and metabolic gas removal The air—ﬁlled porosity (z). is the difference between the
from their root tissues. For terrestrial plants in porous total pore space (4)) and the volumetric water content (9).
substrates, pores are readily drained after watering The volumetric water content may be written in terms of
providing adequate air—ﬁlled pore space for gas the substrate matric potential (h) (van Genuchten, 1980)
5 exchange with the root tissues. Under reduced gravity ""
conditions, capillary forces are dominant, creating water m
: distribution proﬁles and non-uniformities not observed on 6 2 9 + (6 _ l9 ) 1 (1)
earth. A few space borne experiments have ’ ’ ' 1 + ( a I M ) ""
investigated water movement and control in ug, but none -
have investigated the region where oxygen diffusion
becomes the limiting factor for plant growth. Our .
‘ experiment will provide the ﬁrst detailed measurements where 9' and 93 are the resudual 3"""" saturated water
of substrate gas diffusion and water management. The cements. respectively, and a, n, and m are parameters
, measurements are designed to allow the development of directly dependent 0“ the shape 0f the 9”” curve. The

"
"3","parameters required for estimation of the model are 9,, ﬁlling). This provides a relatively constant macropore
as, a, and n, where it is assumed that m=1-1In. 95 is diffusion path across the entire micropore regime
usually known and is easy to obtain experimentally with (roughly half of the total pore space). >
. good accuracy by saturating the medium, leaving only
, three unknown parameters (9,. a and n) to be estimated EXPERIMENTAL
f from the experimental data. Note that 6, describing the
macropore retention is equal to 9.; and is not the residual GAS DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT '
value typically assumed for soils. Here it describes the
water content where macropore drainage occurs, The basis for many laboratory methods for
resulting in a drastic reduction in unsaturated hydraulic measurement of soil gas-diffusivity is the application of 3
conductivity. Since water and nutrient supply to plant Fick's second law (combination of continuity with Fick's .
roots is most available via macropore water. we conﬁne ﬁrst law)
our focus on gas transport to the macropore realm. '
DIFFUSIVE TRANSPORT ¢ 9—9—9: 00 51—9—6» + R (4)
a f a x ‘
. The major mechanism for gas exchange and transport . . .
within a porous medium, lacking a convective force, is A Simpliﬁed form Of an analytical SOllﬁiOﬂ for eq. (4) was
by diffusion through the gaseous and the liquid phases. derived bY Currie (1960) With R = 0 and a constant
This spontaneous process results from the thermal atmospheric concentration, Cs. 3 the substrate surface
motion of gas molecules in air or solution. Gas diffusion (Dirichlet boundary condition) described by Rolston
through air is roughly 10,000 time faster than through (1935) 35
water, further conﬁning our interest to the gas phase
only. The driving force for diffusion is a gradient of partial D 3 t
pressure (or concentration) of any gas within the soil air 2}, exp - ”57qu
causing motion or diffusion. The direction is from C _ Cs as 8
locations having higher concentrations to those of ——-——— = Z —-—-—--,--——-—,--—-——-
reduced concentration. Fick's law describes the ﬂux of C0 ' C 5 ""=1 1 (0!; + h‘) + h
gas mass, JDM, diffusing per unit area per unit time, (5)
given by
where C is the time—dependent gas concentration in the
dC chamber, Co the initial chamber concentration, I is the
JD), = — 0,. “-9- soil length, h = el(a ac). ac is the air content of the
dx (2) chamber, a is the length of the chamber or the volume
(V) per soil area (A), and an are the positive roots of: at
where DA is the diffusion coefﬁcient in free air. and CG is tan(a|)=hl. For most applications, only the first term in
the gas concentration. The diffusion coefﬁcient in air is the series is ""39¢ and thus for large times (t) a plot of
about 1.5x103 to 2.5x103 m2 s‘1 for gases of low In[(C-CS)I(CO -cs)] vs. time becomes linear having a
molecular weight and decreases with the increase in slope Of-DGO12/E where a, is the ﬁrst positive root. The t
molecular W959“t 0f the 935 (Jury 9‘ al., 1991)~ diffusion coefﬁcient. Dc. is determined using least
squares ﬁtting of the time—Oz concentration data. An
GAS D'FFUS'V'TY aitemative method for computing the diffusion coefﬁcient
from the same data was presented by Taylor (1949).
The soil gas diffusion coefﬁcient (D9), which is air—ﬁlled
porosity (a) dependent, may be modeled using a variety DIFFUSION CELL DESIGN
of different models, such as the modiﬁed form of the
Marshall (1959) model, termed the water-induced linear The need for a shailow substrate sample using the
r eduction (WLR) model by “‘0'de et al. (2000) Wine"" coarse textured media selected for microgravity studies
as was apparent in order to reduce gravity’s inﬂuence on
the sample proﬁle water distribution. Preliminary testing
(‘9)2’5 (¢_ 3)” was done using a horizontal flux direction with the
Do = DA ""T"" = DA W (3) substrate being wetted from the bottom by a porous
¢ ¢ stainless steel plate. Measurements were compared to
conventional diffusion cell diffusion determinations and
where DA is the gas diffusion coefﬁcient in air and (p is were poorly wrfeiated in similar media at I0W water
the total porosity. For aggregated porous media such as contents. Guidelines set forth by Giauz end Rolston
those evaluated here, we anticipate needing a (1989) SU9993t 93$ Ichamber . 3“? 5°"" chamber
modiﬁcation of eq. (3) for modeling gas diffusion due to dimensions for minimmhg gas diffusmh measurement
the substrate’s dual pore nature. The reasoning for this errors. These are described as the ratio of the gas to
is based on the unchanged macroporosity for volumetric substrate chamber volumes. and ere presented as a
water contents below Be (i.e., while micropores are function of air—ﬁlied pOfOSIW (8) In Figure 2- After

"
"4","‘3 ' I Reservoir volume cover ,
i .7 “Fit"" 1 ”-25 ‘ 1 plates with sensor and ﬁg;
: g I Optimized purg e ports ’tfjégtmiégm , l.
.. . , A Extrapolated , ti‘iﬁ‘
~§ * 2; J chamber
~ 45?? ”a:%‘% ﬁt“
; '2 10 . 0‘ 15. 02 source “?:?:‘gﬁgf’igggggﬁw
3 0.10 _ ”’ chamber
. AFP=0.05 .
4 . 0', _ , ._ . Substrate "" “ﬁxes Porous
4 s 8 10 12 :4 contatnm ent )ﬁat%% pl at e
‘ Figure 2. Optimal gas chamber and soul chamber lengths wgﬁgﬁgﬂw W
. . . eﬁiaﬁgﬁg‘iﬁﬂ ater
(L) as a function of air-ﬁlled porosny (a = (b —- 9) (Giauz WWW '
J r eservou
and Rolston, 1989).
evaluating the volume ratio of our prototype diffusion
‘ tr s,i wa t rmine . . . . .
cell 5 chamber and sum ate voiume t S de a . . d Figure 1. Oxygen dlfoSlOf‘t cell for gas diffusmn
that a larger gas chamber was needed to minimize . . . . ~
. . . . coefﬁCIent determmation in porous plant growth
measurement error. Since optimal dimenSIons are a substrates The substrate chamber size is 1 9 x 5 x 12 -
function of air—ﬁlled porosity we had to optimize chamber cm ‘ ' ' «
dimensions based on an average a, which is '
approximately 20% for the macropore regime of typical -
microgravity plant growth media. An optimal length of 12 be an important modiﬁcation for measurements made in
cm (Figure 2) was used to compute the required the environment of the space shuttle or international “
prototype chamber volumes shown in Table 1. Using a space station where both pressure and oxygen
source chamber two times larger than the sink provides concentration vary considerably. Oxygen is measured
additions! diffusion capacity, which is reduced by the use with a galvanic 0; sensor installed in the upper plates of
of a dual ciosed—chamber system required for the Space the two chambers providing continuous 02 concentration
Shuttle or ISS environment. measurements.
in preliminary testing, the prototype sink chamber was
purged with nitrogen using two methods prior to -
Table 1. Gas diffusion chamber characteristics. diffusion. In one case the chamber gate was closed and
in the other the chamber gate was left open during ,
Ground-based chamber purging. Average diffusion coefﬁcients and standard
deviations obtained from three measurements were 2.07
Source Substrate Sink i 0.18 (closed) and 1.90 :t 0.20 (open), which are not
i signiﬁcantly different. Because of this and the additional
‘ "" ' "" ‘ ”““’ ""' ‘"" ‘ complexity of having a gate to open and close the gate
Volume cm3 244.4 1 . . . . . ' .
( ) 22 2 1222 was eliminated from the new desugn shown In Figure 1.
Area. (cmz) 26.83 9.68 2279 Once the 02 concentration in the sink chamber reaches
the desired level, the initiation of a diffusion test begins
* Soil chamber length, L = Volume 1' Area, where Area = substrate With the °.""yge”. seqsor momtonng the.mcrease. m 02
cross-secﬁona[areau concentration With time as atmospheric gas diffuses
through the substrate sample. The measurement
WW completion time varies from several hours for dry
material to several days for very wet substrate. Wire .
= Ground—based diffusion cell screens support the substrate, which sits on a porous
. ......._...._.._......____.____.________ stainless steel plate covering a water reservoir. Water ' '
' The ground-based diffusion cell depicted in Figure 1 pressure w'th'n the reservour is maintained under
illustrates the basic components that resulted from constant suction to control the substrate water content ‘
improvements to the prototype design. The prototype usmg the matnc . forces Of the porous plate and
unit operated with only a single ‘sink’ chamber, relying substrate. A Marriott tower connected to the water
on stable atmospheric 0; concentrations and minimal reservatr serves tosuppiy water to the substrate white '
pressure ﬂuctuations in the laboratory for the 02 source. Simultaneously ma'“‘?'“'""9 the suction 0"" the water
The new two-chamber design (Figure 1) is expected to beneath the plate. This maintains a stable water content . ‘-

"
"5","[Sink Chamber
Substrate , 1, “I 10°
Source. ({hamber ﬂ :4’: kr~~01ygen Sensor
‘ a,» 7 i. i, 8mm” valve c ‘ =‘ A A i
?H“ \\ E, 104 \“O\ A A
, s Porous lube Water Source 3 \\\ o o
Containment 5; \\‘\
Screen 'g \\ o
, ‘5 ‘0"" \
t Figure 3. Flight prototype gas diffusion cell conceptual “ A Ma (cm) X 7
design using dual sealed gas chambers and a radially o DsIDatTaytor) \
symmetric geometry with the water supply tube in the :2” 3:: $332} \
center. 10.3 x
' o m 20 30 '
throughout the diffusion cycle and can re—suppiy water Vommem wa‘emntemom
losses in the substrate if needed. The plate at the , _ _ . ,
bottom of the substrate was the optimal design for 1«g Figure 4- Relative oxygeri d'ﬁE‘S'Oh measured 'h the
gas diffusion measurements, whﬂe for O-g prototype ground-based diffusmn cell usmg Ottowa sand
measurements, we have chosen a radially symmetric «)5 "" 0-6 mm)shownazse1function 0f volumetnc water
design patterned after porous tube water supply systems content (DA ""' 0-153 cm 5 )-
which have been previously tested in microgravity .
(Morrow 9t 3'"" 1992- 1993)- and soil sample used here. This will be further 7
, . . considered by adjusting the chamber volumes to ‘
. W determine the effect on the resulting diffusion coefﬁcient .
calculations. Two different diffusion models are
The prototype ﬂight diﬁUSiOh cell 53 illustrated in Figure 3 iliustrated in Figure 4, one being the WLR model eq. (3) j
demonstrating the radial symmetry and streamlining, and the other. the Miiiington and Quirk (1961) diffusion ‘
designed to provide efﬁcient packaging for multiple cells model given as ;
in a microgravity experiment. The ﬂight prototype Lo {9 ‘
maintains the same design criteria of the ground-based g 3 (¢ __ g) 3 _‘_ _
unit for chamber and substrate lengths using a modiﬁed Dc = D A “'3' z 0,4 “""3""” (5)
cross-section. The advantage of a water supply tube for ‘15 ¢
maintaining water within the substrate is that air is less
€35“)! trapped in tUbihQ than in a large reservoir used in Since these diffusion models have been thoroughly
the ground-based Uhit- A critical part Of making 933 evaluated in a variety of soils where the expected trend f
., diffusion measurements in microgravity is to maintain in diffusion as a function of air.ﬁ||ed porosity is we"" _
hydraulic continuity in the system necessary to maintain known, the disparity between our measurements and ‘
uniform water distribution. Sending the substrate into these models |eave in question the Validity of the :
orbit in a lightly wetted state Wi"" aid initial wetting and measurements in Figure 4_ We expect the diffusion
reduce particle separation 8hd rearrangement. SGVBTBI coefﬁcient to be reduced with increasing water content i
* past microgravity experiments have suffered due to by 3 to 4 orders of magnitude over the water content ‘
particle separation or hydrophobic surfaces (Pochsky range as predicted by the models. The fact that diffusion
and Mashinsky, 1994: Yendier at 3L. 1995)- The coefﬁcient values close to saturation are similar to those
existence 0f 'iClUid bridges between particles improves at median moisture contents. suggests a possible teak
‘ the uniformity 0f wetting and minimizes particle or open pathway that maintains diffusion at a level
rearrangement and separation (Jones and Or,1999). similar to mid-range diffusion values. One possible
source is from edge effects where a lack of wetting
RESULTS between the container edge and the sand would lead to .
signiﬁcant gas diffusion along the wail. A leak in the
DIFFUSION iN OTTOWA SAND diffusion chamber itself (between ﬁttings) is another
possible problem. which is difﬁcult to pinpoint with the
Gas diffusion measurements, relative to diffusion in air, prototype singte chamber ciesign. The dual chamber
were made in Ottowa sand that was previously sieved to system will be more easuiy tested for leaks (and
between 0.5 and 0.6 mm diameter. Measurements were subsequently sealed). Edg‘eeffects can be examined .,
made over a range of water contents from dry to nearly using wall linings or other Similar approaches.
saturated. Diffusion coefﬁcients were calculated using
two different methods discussed previously. The MICROGRAVITY PLANT GROWTH SUBSTRATES
divergence in the two methods with increasing water _ ' _
content suggests a potential violation of the assumptions The water retention curves shown in Figure 5 illustrate
used in the Currie technique for the scale of chamber several unique characteristics common for many of the
r . g“ ‘ . .r

"
"6","t. 10'
14 = Micropores > MBWPOTBS
12 10° - .
E 1“ g ' ' - '
/ 3 10 g -1 ‘
? .‘é \ ‘5'. 1° ‘ ‘
5 8 «Wag § .2 I 13:23:33? - ' .
‘- n. 6 \\ g ‘0 I tsotite 1mm
- 1:: . ° \ ‘0 % o tsotite 2mm
; .. -——- w RM l
; g 4 ' . \ "" m ‘0'3 L ode 9: '
1: Wetting I -
‘ 2 6c ” MicrOpores ~ ' Macropores
{ 10‘
' o D 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
0 1° 20 3° 4° 50 60 70 Volumetric water content (%)
Volumetric Water Content
Figure 6. Oxygen diffusion in Turface and lsolite for two , I
' particle sizes as a function of water content. Modelied
Figure 5. Substrate water characteristic (SWC) curves for results are from eq. (7) where D A = 0.153 cm2 s“.
Turface (1 -— 2 mm) showing both wetting and drying
processes. The critical water content, 8c, separates water _ . , _
intemai to particles (micropore) from between—particie that may avoad or reduce air entrapment include partial
water (macropore). wetting (macropores remain aIr-ﬁlied during air release)
prior to saturation or vacuum extracting air in saturated
cand'date lant g owth b tat s f e _ zuiastrate followed by partial drainage prior to space ""
l p r su sr e or us m ig t. ‘
microgravity. They typically i) are sieved to a narrow
particle-size distribution (and consequently exhibits a DIFFUSION IN PLANT GROWTH SUBSTRATES
narrow pore-size distribution), ii) exhibit dual porosity
Wt“ 239'""? ta/amde PCIEtS’SI'tY m .ﬁfd'tﬁ” t0 the (1:30“: Relative gas diffusion data were collected in candidate .,
POVOS| . .e een Pa '0 9?, I"" S 0W S'QW'C?"" microgravity plant growth substrates shown in Figure 6.
gyztegesgz én 8!: water rdetgmoq 525139,? ?eween welrttlng Diffusion data were collected using Turface (1‘2 and 05* i L
n W' . nes an r. . W re ease 3'99 1 mm) a baked clay and Isolite (1 and 2 mm) a
amounts of air (and some heat) from the micrepores diatomaceous sea mud that is extruded and baked. Data
Ugo"" ctwe'tttpg from an. initially 'dTY sftate. ”[5 '33t collected in a'relativeiy dry state (micropore water) were
feggaingn: :wpgzggtrzegcigsbgragemsmﬁoegtgsgngiﬁ tmheasurted usmg conventional gasj diffusiotr:1 cells,twhile
- e we er me ia were measure usm 9 me e
°§59W3ﬁ°h5 have shown that shortly after sattirating, ground based diffusion cell. Two aspecgs of thgse (?gia
m'fgozcgg: gigrbubbieﬁsogrefrerasted “hm mean???"" stand out: 1) the diffusion coefﬁcient measured in the
gfoces: the “\t’lid Softfme o? thae :Ltlibggatgtg Zapa'erede migrogore dregime; 0'6"" 28:)“, deg is relatively; goxtant I
, _ ,_ _ - an or ers o magnl u e l erence exns e een
lghssggt‘:m:ngong§h:r;ai:2 0;; ozﬁr‘sggiaett'? 3:12: data and model predictions in the wet region where 6 is
smaller hubbles coalesce becoming trapped in large greater than 9"" A modiﬁcation Of eq. (3) is suggested for
pores. This trappe d air may work its way to the surface this two-pore regioh substrate, where a constant IS used
and in the process causes loosening and rearrangement i: gizgnfng'ﬁgsﬁnldat theta Ticrgggae dscaiebzndtha
of particles. which can appear as material swelling. The mocro r .2"" 9“ rup e a. ( ) escri s e
dynamics of this process in combination with a po 3 mg ,wn en as
subsequent wetting and drying processes can alter the 15
physncal packing and consequently the water retention D A -(¢-—0)' —-+ micropores
character of the substrate over time. Gravity’s force D 3 (¢ __ 9)” (7)
provides a stabilizing inﬂuence that buffers much of the G D A --——-—-—-———-—+ macropores
particle movement on earth. (¢ "" 6c)
in ' ' ' - . . . . .
solgicgﬂggrtyentge szzggas'tsb“:y:‘;¥e Oguaggtggﬁ' 2:3 _The relatively constant diffusmn coefﬁCients determmed
serious problem because air released from the substrate m the micropore ﬁlling range Is due to .the. small
in any form will simply form along the walls of the contribtition of the micrOpores _to gas difoSion in
particles with no buoyancy force to drive them out of the ﬁggag'sggnto magopore diffusmtn. 32m”??? ”:9
water phase. Fluid expansion in microgravity has the p . . '. 9 gion, “""5? urae Y {a‘U'C
potential to become a Iong~term condition Techni ues conciuctiwty '8 iowand a companson Of conventional
' q (vertical ﬂux) diffusmn methods was well correlated to
. / ﬂ

"
"7","our horizontal diffusion measurements. As water begins process could conceivably continue until the water
,7 ﬁlling macropores, however. unsaturated hydraulic content was reduced to the intersection of the wetting
conductivity is much greater and small gravity gradients curve at which point water would begin to be re-supplied
‘ are sufﬁcient to produce signiﬁcant differences in the according to the energy gradient developing within the
- vertaeal water content proﬁle for the coarse textured substrate. Referring to Figure 5. this shift from the drying
media used here. The effect of this on the gas diffusion to wetting curve translates to a difference in water
f measurement is a greater cross~sectional area for gas content of 0.2 or more than 50 percent of the available :
diffusion in the upper regions of the porous medium macropore water. The less obvious consequence of this
compared to the wetter media at the bottom of the shift is that while oxygen diffusion would be enhanced,
sample, thus the need for a thin sampie. The effect of hydraulic conductivity is diminished and water supply
, particle size is also apparent in the diffusion data for the may become limiting to plant growth under certain
macropore regime. where smaller particle sizes for each scenarios. If water content could be directly monitored
substrate show smaller diffusion values. Further and controlled, there would be less uncertainty within the
modiﬁcation is needed to couple the diffusion processes root zone. Unfortunately, NASA ﬂight restrictions on
across the two pore regimes described in eq. (7). electromagnetic (EM) emissions limit and generaliy
exclude EM measurement methods (due to engineering
. EFFECT OF HYSTERESIS ON DIFFUSION and qualification costs), leaving only a few water content
measurement options such as the heat pulse technique.
One factor that will have a signiﬁcant impact on the gas whose accuracy suffers from contact effects.
diffusion rates within the substrate, is the hysteresis in
water retention illustrated in Figure 5. This effect can be CONCLUSION
hypothetically demonstrated using the water retention for
wetting and drying processes coupled with a diffusion Novel gas diffusion devices for measurements on earth
equation expressed in Figure 7 as a function of metric and in orbit have been designed and are being
suction, WHO"" is typically the variable to WHO“ water evaluated. The ground-based diffusion cell design 5
status is maintained within a porous medium for optimizes gas and soil chamber dimensions considering
microgravity conditions. For illustration DUFPOSGS. W6 substrate characteristics such as particle size and water V‘
select a control point of 3 cm suction for 1 to 2 mm retention in combination with the water content 2 ‘
Turface. The two diffusion curves demonstrate a measurement range of interest. Oxygen diffusion ‘
7 variation in the computed oxygen diffusion coefﬁcient of coefﬁcients determined using the prototype ground~
more than an order of magnitude, which could easily be based unit were comparable to results from a
the difference between a well-aerated or hypoxic root conventional diffusion cell and are in reasonable
zone. agreement with the WLR diffusion model under dry '
conditions. Further testing is underway to reduce
For long term plant growth conditions, one may begin potential sources of measurement error such as edge
with a saturated substrate drained to the control point of effects or possible chamber leaks. Critical issues that
3 cm suction. Over time, however. it is possible that may impact gas diffusion include the substantial
localized water may be extracted from individual pores variability in water content control induced by substrate
- Ly plant roots while maintaining the 3 cm suction within water retention hysteresis and the additional
the substrate (i.e., no change in energy potential). This complicating inﬂuences of air release and entrapment for
' past and presently used plant growth substrates. ""
Unfortunately these are inherent characteristics of these -
: 01 media and it may be that novel porous media designs 5
.5- are needed to improve media physical characteristics for ‘v
""m greater water content control while maintaining optimal
Ea. ‘ levels of both liquid and gas ﬂuxes. For the near future ?
E W we will focus on improving the quality of ground-based ;
_ E ""9 gas diffusion measurements in a variety of growth media ‘2
§ and on the design and testing of automated diffusion
: 5 ’ measurement ﬂight hardware. :
% Mm Hypotheticaldtﬂusion coefﬁcient ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
« 5 range for a system‘operated
53 under 3 am Ofsucmn' The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from a ‘
mm NASA—JSC grant NAG 9-1284. :
0 2 4 6 B 10 12 14 i
Metric suction [cm] RE FERENCES :
Figure 7. Oxygen diffusion modeled using eq. (3) based . .. - ~ . ~
on the hysteretic water retention data of Turface (1-2 22;""? A $35222; ggfgyéggufg‘ T ﬁguggidia.
mm) shown in Figure 5 as described by eq. (1). 11' 31'4_317 y ' ' ' ' '

"
"8",". Morrow, R. C.. W. R. Dinauer. R.J. Bula. T.W. Tibbitts. '
Glauz, R. D. and D. E. Rolston (1989). ""Optimal design (1993). ""The ASTROCULTURE-1 ﬂight experiment:
of two-chamber. gas diffusion cells.” Soil Sci. Soc. Am. pressure control of the WCSAR porous tube nutrient
J. 53: 1619-1624. delivery system."" SAE Technical Paper Series Paper
No. 932282.
f Jones, S. B. and D. Or (1999). ""Microgravity effects on
' water ﬂow and distribution in unsatuated porous media: Podolsky, I. and A. Mashinsky (1994). ""Peculiarities of
Analysis of ﬂight experiments."" Water Resour. Res. 3(4): moisture transfer in capillary-porous soil substitutes i
929-942. during space ﬂight.“ Adv. Space Res. 14(11): 39-46. . ”2
Jury, W. A.. W. R. Gardner. et al. (1991). Soil Physics. Rolston, D. E. (1986). Gas diffusivity. Methods of Soil
, New York, NY, John Wiley and Sons. Analysis. A. Klute. Madison, Wisconsin, Am. Soc. Agron.
Monograph 9: 1089-1102.
Marshall, T. J. (1959). ""The diffusion of gases through
porous media.” J. Soil Sci. 10: 79-82. Taylor, S. A. (1949). ”Oxygen diffusion in porous media
as a measure of soil aeration.” Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 14:
Millington, R. J. and J. P. Quirk (1961). ""Permeability of 55-61. .
porous solids."" Trans. Faraday Soc. 57: 1200-1207.
vanGenuchten, M. T. (1980). ""A closed—form equation for
Moldrup, P., T. Olesen, J. Gamst, P. Schjonning, T. predicting the hydraulic conductivity of unsaturated ""
Yamaguchi, D.E. Rolston. (2000). ""Predicting the gas sous."" Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 44: 892-898. 1
diffusion coefﬁcient in repacked soil: WateMnduced
linear reduction model."" Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 64: 1588- Yendler, B. 8., B. Webbon, et al. (1996). ""Capillary
1594. movement of liquid in granular beds in microgravity.”
Adv. Space Res. 18(4/5): 233-237. '7'
' Morrow, R. C., R. J. Bula, T.W. Tibbitts, W.R. Dinauer. :
(1992). ”A matrix-based porous tube water and nutrient CONTACT -
delivery system."" SAE Technical Paper Series Paper
”0- 921390- Scott B. Jones; Dept. Plants, Soils and Biometeorology; ‘
Utah State University; Logan, UT 84322—4820; Email:
sjones@mendel.usu.ed
,. ' .. ' ; 1..
\ ’

"
