"","x"
"1","Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075
DOI 10.1007/S00405—011—1493—2
MISCELLANEOUS

Subjective Visual vertical in erect/supine subjects and under

microgravity: effects of lower body negative pressure

Marco Lucertini - Claudio De Angelis -

Marialuisa Martelli - Valfredo Zolesi -

Enrico Tomao

Received: 16 July 2010/ Accepted: 10 January 2011 / Published online: 4 February 2011

© Springer—Verlag 2011

Abstract Perception of the subjective Visual vertical expected, the inﬂuence of the frame on red positioning was

(SVV) is mainly based on the contributions from the Visual, statistically signiﬁcant in all test conditions. During the in—

vestibular, and proprioceptive systems, and participates to ﬂight experimental step, a substantial lack of signiﬁcant

the process of spatial orientation in relation to the sur— Changes compared to the pre—ﬂight condition was observed.

rounding environment and t0 the gravito—inertial force. The Moreover, substantially no effects due to LBNP were

SVV can be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the presence of a observed. A mild rod displacement from the body aXis was

displaced Visual ﬁeld, as in the case of the rod and frame detected under microgravity compared to the pre—ﬂight

test (RFT). A series of studies showed the effects of hae— recording. Such a ﬁnding was in part reduced during

matic mass shifts to and from the lower limbs 0n SVV, due LBNP. The same ﬁndings were observed during the post—

to Visceral mechanoreceptors (VM) located at the level of ﬂight repetition of the experiment. Our results showed an

the kidneys and 0f the thorax. These sensors may be arti— absence in this subject of signiﬁcant effects on the RFT due

ﬁcially activated with a lower body negative pressure to microgravity. In conclusion, no effects from his VM on

(LBNP) deVice. In this study, the role of Visual and VM the RFT and minor Changes in the SVV could be detected.

cues to orientation perception have been evaluated using

the RFT and the LBNP deVices under a microgravity Keywords Subjective Visual vertical - Rod and frame test-

environment. A preliminary investigation was conducted in Lower body negative pressure - Longitudinal body aXis -

a sample of military pilots to develop a RFT protocol to be Weightlessness - Microgravity - Posture variations

used in microgravity environments. This protocol was

adopted to evaluate the contribution of VM to the SVV in a

cosmonaut before, during and after a 10 day space ﬂight, Introduction

with and without concurrent activation of LBNP. The same

test sequence, including LBNP exposure, was repeated a The Visual verticality judgements (subjective Visual verti—

few months later on Earth on the same subject. As cal: SVV) are based on the contributions from the Visual,
vestibular, and proprioceptive systems (for a review see
[15]) and represent one of the various parameters to eval—

— uate the individual’s spatial orientation in relation to the

M. Lueertini (E) - C. De Angelis - E. Tomao surrounding environment and t0 the gravito—inertial force

Italian Air Force Medical Corps, IML Roma, (G113).

Zﬁifiiffﬁﬁli’iﬂiirifiﬂﬁ’cﬂiesait The SW hhhhhg h usually Phhfhhhhd whh th hhgh-
ment of a Visual indicator of verticality (a rotating rod in

M. Martelli most cases), which must be positioned in a vertical position

Department Of PSYChOlOgYa according to the subject’s indications.

“La Sapienza” Universjty Of Rome’ Rome’ Italy This test is commonly employed in many clinical

V. 201681 applications, to monitor the subjective orientation of nor—

Kayser Italia manufacturer,Livorn0,Ita1y mal versus acutely 0r chronically equilibrium impaired

@ Springer

"
"2","1068 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075
subjects, and also is a good indicator of the contribution This latter tool induces a reduction of barometric pres—
from the utricular macula to the ocular counter—rolling [1, sure in the caudal parts of the body (legs and abdominal
8, 27, 30, 31]. lower third), which in turn produces ﬂuid mass shifts
However, such a test also plays a signiﬁcant role in the according to the pressure Changes. Under 1G conditions, to
analysis of orientation in particular experimental and satisfy essential safety parameters, LBNP testing must be
environmental situations, as those obtained on Earth in performed exclusively on healthy Clinostatic subjects.
speciﬁc laboratory settings [2, 11, 12, 14, 16, 19], or those However, a genuine contribution of VM to orientation
related to GIF variations [5, 6, 18, 32]. can hardly be expected on Earth, due to the multi—sensory
The results of SVV testing can be signiﬁcantly altered GIF related input, so that the microgravity condition should
by the presence of an artiﬁcially displaced Visual ﬁeld. In be considered to better evaluate their role, and rule out
the rod and frame illusion, a luminous vertical rod pre— possible bias. Previous studies conducted in weightlessness
sented within a tilted luminous square in an otherwise dark showed an increase in the weight of Visual information in
room, is perceived tilted in the direction opposite to that of determining the verticality judgements [5 , 24]. This has
the frame [35]. This rod and frame test (RFT) was devel— been interpreted as evidence for the lack of competing
oped to analyse the role of Visual and gravitational cues in information from other sensory systems (mainly vestibular
detecting the SVV. and proprioceptive) normally sensitive to gravity, with a
The relative contribution of speciﬁc Visual mechanisms, subsequent increased role of Visual cues.
local interactions between adj acent orientations and global Furthermore, under microgravity the blood mass is more
form analysis, and vestibular and proprioceptive compo— homogeneously distributed within the body, altering pos—
nents to the verticality judgements have been extensively sible GIF orientation cues also from VM.
studied together with the stimulus Characteristics that A possibility to analyse the contribution of VM to ori—
enhance the role of one of these cues [3, 8, 9, 11, 24, 26, entation could be the artiﬁcial shift of the haematic mass
32,34]. with a LBNP under weightlessness, and this could be
The difference between the real vertical and the erro— veriﬁed by changes in the RFT.
neous rod adjustment progressively increases with the level Therefore, the present investigation aimed at evaluating,
of the frame tilt up to 22.5 0 [15 , 25], so that a frame tilt of under microgravity, hypothetical SVV and RFT variations
200 was utilized as an effective stimulus to alter an before, during and after the effects of LBNP. We measured
otherwise correct rod setting [28]. rod alignment errors to the longitudinal body aXis on a
Among the different mechanisms underlying human blank ﬁeld and in the presence of an uninformative tilted
orientation on Earth, a further subjective sense of the Visual frame surrounding the rod with and without the
direction of the sole longitudinal body aXis can be evalu— induced contribution of VM cues. Theoretically, under
ated (longitudinal aXis sensation: LAS) [20]. weightlessness, due to the absence of gravitational cues
On Earth, in orthostatic individuals, the SVV usually signaling the veridical vertical, a general increase in mis—
overlaps with the LAS, while in supine subjects the two alignment errors should be expected as well as an increase
vectors may signiﬁcantly differ. in the errors induced by the tilted frame, with respect to
Under weightlessness, many subjects can still indicate pre—ﬂight ground recordings. On the converse, if VM cues
an SVV, mainly based on their head—retinal coordinates as play a signiﬁcant role in orientation perception, the
the primary references [10, 23], while maintaining sub— observer under microgravity should less heaVily rely on the
stantially unaltered their LAS, so that they can orient their Visual information provided by the tilted frame during the
body according to the Visual input. exposure to LBNP resulting in more accurate rod settings.
Recent studies also showed the presence of Visceral
mechanoreceptors (VM) presumably located at the level of
the kidneys and of the thoraX, contributing to the genesis of Materials and methods
the sense of GIF direction, possibly Via the detection of
blood mass shifts within the trunk and producing a further The study was approved by the ethical committee of our
image of body orientation with respect to gravity [17, 21, Department and in accordance with the statements of the
22, 29, 33]. declaration of Helsinki. Moreover, all participants gave
Such experiments showed effects on SVV on the part of their informed consent prior to their inclusion in the
haematic mass shifts to and from the lower limbs. This research.
analysis was performed manipulating the lower body A preliminary investigation was conducted on Earth to
intravascular pressure either Via centrifugation, or inducing evaluate the RFT errors of control observers in judging the
external pressure variations with a lower body negative gravitational vertical (GIF) compared to a longitudinal
pressure deVice (LBNP). body aXis alignment task (LAS). Subjects were also tested
@ Springer

"
"3","Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075 1069
in orthostatic and clinostatic position to evaluate differ— A schematic SVA conﬁguration is shown in Fig. l
ences in the LAS. (external View) and Fig. 2 (internal View from the test

To evaluate the role of Visual, vestibular, proprioceptive, subject’s eyes).
and VM cues to the LAS the experiment was then per— For preliminary and post—ﬁight recordings, a SVA
formed on a European Space Agency (ESA) cosmonaut ground model was developed, with identical test charac—
before, during and after the exposure to microgravity teristics of the in—ﬁight model, but in different material and
during a space mission. Under microgravity, the LBNP was power supply.
manipulated to detect possible pressure—induced changes in Before each test sequence, the instrument was calibrated
the RFT. according to the gravitational vertical (for orthostatic on

A few months after re—entry, the same test sequence Earth measurements), or to the longitudinal body aXis of
could be repeated on the same subject before, during and the test subject (for clinostatic on Earth recordings and for
after the exposure to LBNP. in—ﬁight ones).

To evaluate the SVV and perform the RFT, a subjective Due to the absence of gravitational cues, during the in—
vertical analyzer (SVA) was designed and developed. It ﬂight measurements, the SVV concept, which on Earth
was compatible with the space environment, and resistant implies a GIF component, was replaced by the one of body
to the acceleration and Vibration of take—off. Moreover, it aXis alignment (i.e. in accordance with the LAS).
ﬁtted all the electromagnetic requirements and the hygienic To analyse possible discrepancies between the adoption
and accident—proof needs related to an on board use inside of GIF versus LAS as the reference point to determine the
spacecrafts. SVV, nine healthy male volunteers, aged between 23 and

The SVA (manufacturer: Kayser Italia srl) consists of an 28 years, were asked to align the SVA rod either with the
aluminum tube (300 mm of diameter; 525 mm long; mass GIF vector or with their LAS during a standing RFT
2.350 kg), which completely isolates the tested subject evaluation.
from the external environment with regard to Visual stim— After this preliminary investigation, further eleven male
uli. This is essential to eliminate undesired Visual refer— subjects (same age range) repeated the RFT, considering
ences and related possible bias during the SVV and RFT, the sole LAS as the orientation reference, but this time
without darkening the whole segment of the International comparing the orthostatic versus the clinostatic position.
Space Station (188) where the experiment was carried out. According to the standard criteria of our laboratory, in

Two disks were inserted in the two extremities of the all cases the procedure started from two different initial rod
tube. The ﬁrst (subject side) was the interface with the positions: in the ﬁrst, the rod was randomly set by the
subject, who could observe the inside of the tube through a operator between 25° and 40° in a clockwise (CW) position
hole surrounded by a silicone structure derived from a sub— for the subject’s eyes (negative values on the SVA goni—
aqua mask, which completely eliminated light from ometer), while in the second between 25° and 40° counter—
outside. clockwise (CCW: positive values on the goniometer).

In the internal surface of the second disk (operator side) The same sequence was then repeated with the frame
a luminous rod was inserted, which occupied 20° of Visual switched on.
angle and could rotate 360° in both directions (i.e. clock— For each RFT condition (i.e.: “only rod” and “rod —|—
and counterclock—wise), and a luminous ﬁxed frame, which frame”), the arithmetical average between CW and CCW
was set at 20° of tilt to the right with respect to the test results was taken into account for data analysis.
subject’s eyes, to obtain a high degree of rod displacement An interval of about 30 s was always taken before the
during the RFT [28]. On the external part of the SVA beginning of the test sequence, to set the instrument in its
operator disk, two switches could separately light up the starting position and to reduce possible bias due to mem—
rod and/or the frame, and a goniometer (accuracy of 1°) orization of the external environment [30].
was also inserted. At the centre of this external side, a During such an interval, the subject was asked to close
rotating knob directly connected to the rod, and indicating his eyes and maintain his head in the SVA mask.
on the goniometer the difference between the SVV (i.e. the A further aim of this preliminary investigation was the
one reported by the subject) and the real one, was placed. analysis of the easy and rapid repeatability of the whole

All recordings implied the presence of two subjects: one RFT sequence on the part of unskilled operators (as the
operator, who conducted the test from the SVA operator cosmonauts who were going to perform this research in the
side, and one test subject. 188).

The SVA could be ﬁxed to the universal mechanical arm The different test conditions (i.e. LAS vs. GIF as ref—
of the Russian ISS segment, to stabilize its orientation with erence point for rod adjustment, erect vs. supine subjects,
respect to the test subject, during the in—ﬁight recordings. CW and CCW rod rotation) were randomly administered to

@ Springer

"
"4","1070 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075
Fig. 1 External View Of the Hand screw Handle
ﬂight model SVA cylinder to fix the SVA to ISS Universal Bracket (to rotate and control the ROD)
E‘I‘II ' °
VSV Fixing system , \‘3!
IN
///'/ f4)
MASK DISK ‘I‘ 0
. t I I""
5 ‘1 \
b ""\ x \
I"" ' '\ \ 0 \
l; I"" \\\O X. . — I
I \ -‘ O
l I \ \
1. 1. \
1‘ 1‘ \\
\ \\\_ 0 Button switch
‘ “m: - - "" (to switch On/Off the ROD)
\.\ ’v
\Q Goniometer
\ 7’ Frame Control Box
\* .
\‘\., In Button switch
\‘ (to switch On/Off the frame)
ROD DISK
ROD Disk (Second Disk)
.. Tube
Mask Disk (Subject Disk)
/
'/
If V
V: )
f
1 ° .
I
0
00°
our subjects, to rule out possible bias due to hypothetical steps, corresponding to the RFT before (in—ﬂight 1),
learning, or adaptation effects. during (in—ﬂight 2) and after (in—ﬂight 3) the exposure
The RFT was then performed on an ESA cosmonaut t0 LBNP.
involved in a 10—day space taXi mission, and consisted of 3. Post-ﬂight session. Carried out on the 3rd day after re—
three consecutive experimental sessions: entry to Earth.
1. Pre-ﬂight session. Carried out on Earth, about 1 month All these recordings were conducted wearing the CHI—
before the ﬂight. BIS LBNP device, which was activated only during the in—
2. In-ﬂight session. Carried out in the ISS 0n the 7th ﬂight part of the experiment. This procedure aimed at
mission day (i.e. after the end of the space adaptation reducing possible bias due to the concurrent tactile input
syndrome); this session was in its turn divided into 3 coming from the skin contact with the instrument.
@ Springer

"
"5","Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075 1071
Fig. 2 Internal View of the Inner diameter of the equnpment
SVA cylinder from the test
subject’s side, showing the rod
surrounded by a 200 CW tilted
frame
F sxed Frame
K ‘ versus vertical)
| \

Therefore, in both pre— and post—ﬂight sessions, the cos— The RFT started 1 min after reaching the required
monaut was tested upright, to produce a body contact with negative pressure, to stabilize the new ﬂuid distribution
the instrument as similar as possible to the situation of (i.e. 3 min after the beginning of depressurization).
ﬂoating under microgravity inside the 188. In all sessions, Finally, the in—ﬂight third step was performed 2 min
the subject was asked to align the rod according to his after the LBNP deactivation. As in the previous situation,
LAS. this delay was related to both the pressure and ﬂuid

The CHIBIS model used in the pre— and post—ﬂight stabilization.
sessions was identical to the one used in the ISS, and can Three days after re—entry to Earth, the RFT was repeated
be worn like a pair of trousers, allowing some, albeit under the same experimental conditions adopted for the
limited, motility. In the 188, it is anchored to the ﬂoor and pre—ﬂight recording.
linked to a vacuum pump, controlled by a pressure gauge, A few months later, the same ESA cosmonaut was
and can reach the low pressure needed for this experiment tested on Earth under identical LBNP conditions (i.e.
(—30 mmHg with respect to the surrounding environment) —30 mmHg for the same time duration), although with our
in about 2 min. laboratory LBNP device (i.e. not the CHIBIS). In this case,

This low pressure value was selected in analogy to the subject was lying supine on a board and wearing the
previous studies conducted on Earth [29], as to satisfy the LBNP instrument, while being monitored for ECG and
guidelines for a safe use of LBNP [l3]. arterial pressure. The test sequence and time schedule were

During the in—ﬂight session, the cosmonaut under test identical to those performed on orbit, with three consecu—
was continuously monitored for cardiovascular parameters tive recording sessions (before, during and after LBNP).
(ECG and arterial pressure) to detect early possible
derangements induced by the LBNP. These data were
telemetrically sent to Earth and controlled by the ESA Results
mission space ﬂight surgeon. Due to the short duration of
the scheduled telemetrical contact to Earth (i.e. about The RFT could quite easily be performed even by non—
10 min), this safety aspect limited the possibility of a expert individuals, as those undergoing the preliminary
repetition of the test sequence for more than one time, so study. Therefore, it was concluded that the task could be
that only one complete RFT sequence could be easily performed by a space crew without any long lasting
performed. training.

@ Springer

"
"6","1072 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075
Table 1 Main data from the preliminary investigation
Only rod Rod + frame Only rod Rod + frame Only rod Rod + frame Only rod Rod + frame
(GIF) (GIF) (LAS) (LAS) (upright) (upright) (supine) (supine)
Mean —0.6 —2.9 —0.6 —3.3 —0.7 —2.5 —0.8 —3.5
SD 1.6 1.8 1.5 1.9 1.7 2.4 2.9 3.6
Mean values (in degrees) and SD of rod displacement with respect to the calibrated vertical in both the “only rod” and the “rod + frame”
conditions; the ﬁrst four columns are referred to the GIF versus SLA comparison, while the last four indicate the data from the upright versus
supine position. Negative values indicate that the rod resulted rotated in a CW direction with respect to the subject’s eyes

In these subjects, the test sequence needed about 100 s Table 2 Mean values (in degrees) of rod displacement in the cos—
to be performed, SO that the cosmonaut’s exposure to monaut undergoing the different experimental steps following the
LBNP at —30 mmHg was calculated to be shorter than Bre—ﬁight ,baseline data collection: dataare indicated for both the

, , , , , , , , only rod and the rod + frame condltlons
3 min. (i.e.l min for ﬂuid stabilization —|— less than 2 min —
to perform the RFT). Therefore, we could calculate the Only md ROd + frame Diff‘
whole in—ﬂight session to last about 10 min (i.e. 300 s for 3 Pre—ﬂight _3.00 _4.75 +1.75
RFT repetitions, and ﬁve more minutes for LBNP changes In—ﬂight 1 —6.50 _7.50 +1.00
and ﬂuid stabilization), in agreement with the telemetry In—ﬂight 2 (LBNP on) _5.50 _7.00 +1.50
needs‘ . . . . . In—ﬁight 3 —6.50 —6.50 0

In our preliminary analys1s, very Similar results were Post—ﬂight _2.50 _4.00 +1.50
obtained using the LAS or the GIF as the reference vector —
to align the rod in orthostatic individuals, With no mean The third column shows the amount of the frame induced increase in
differences in the “only rod” condition and of only 0.40 in md dISplaCCment
the “rod —|— frame” one (ANOVA F = 0.83 for the LAS During the in—ﬁight 1 recording, a substantial lack of
vs. GIF comparison). changes with respect to the pre—ﬁight condition was

These data, separated for the “only rod” and the observed, which denotes in this subject an absence of
“rod —|— frame” test condition, are indicated in Table 1 signiﬁcant effects due to microgravity, at least as far as the
(ﬁrst four columns), which also shows the results recorded RFT is concerned.
in upright versus supine subjects (last four columns), when Moreover, no effects induced by LBNP were observed
only the LAS was asked to be adopted as the reference for (difference between in—ﬁight l and in—ﬂight 2 of only 0.500
rod alignment. Also in this case, the difference between the in the “rod —|— frame” condition), even at the return to
two postural conditions was not statistically signiﬁcant ambient pressure, when a complete absence of effects from
(ANOVA F = 0.35; p = 0.57). the frame lighting could be detected.

As expected from our experience and from literature However, Table 2 also shows that if the sole response of
ﬁndings, the inﬂuence of the frame on rod positioning was the “only rod” condition is analyzed, a mild rod dis—
statistically signiﬁcant in all test conditions (e.g. p = 0.002 placement from the body aXis can be detected under
in the GIF vs. LAS comparison), with a clear tilt of the rod microgravity with respect to the pre—ﬁight recording, in
under the effect of the frame. agreement with the rationale of this experiment. Such a

Table 2 shows the data obtained in our cosmonaut ﬁnding was in part (50%) reduced during LBNP, while a
during his three experimental sessions (i.e. pre—, in—, and return to in—ﬁight 1 values was recorded after exposure.
post—ﬂight). Table 3 indicates the data obtained in the same cos—

The results of the in—ﬂight session are in their turn monaut a few months after re—entry, when an identical
diVided in to three consecutive steps (before, during and experimental session as the in—ﬂight one could be
after LBNP, corresponding to in—ﬂight 1, 2 and 3). performed.

The pre—ﬁight results showed a mild inﬂuence in SVV Globally, the results of this session were very similar to
perception on the part of the tilted frame, indicating a low those previously obtained, although a slightly stronger
Visual ﬁeld dependence of this subject, at least under such dependence on the Visual frame of reference was observed.
test conditions. In fact, the rod setting errors increase in the presence of

The comparison between pre— and post—ﬂight sessions the frame relative to the rod only condition ranged from
showed that the exposure for 10 days to microgravity did 1.50 to 3.00 in the direction of the frame tilt, while during
not produce signiﬁcant changes in our test battery (data the in—ﬁight recordings they ranged from 00 to 1.50.
substantially identical in both sessions), which is in Finally, no changes in the “only rod” condition were
agreement with previous studies [32]. detected in this session before, during and after LBNP,
@ Springer

"
"7","Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075 1073
Table 3 Post—ﬁight session mean values (in degrees) of rod dis— our data Of SigniﬁCant RFT differences between the erect
placement in the cosmonaut undergoing the 3 different experimental and supine position could also be related to the SpCCiﬁC
steps;”data are indicated for both the “only rod” and the “rod + population that was analyzed in our preliminary study,
frame condltlons . . . . .
— s1nce they were military pilots underg01ng the standard
Only md ROd + frame aerophysiological training in our department.
Ground BDC 1 —6.0 —8.0 This type of control population was selected since the
Ground LBNP on _5.0 —8.0 cosmonaut that we were going to test was a military pilot as
Ground BDC 2 —6.0 —7.5 we”-
_— Other authors reported a low ﬁeld dependence in pilots
11:32:31? data COHCCUOH (BBC) ls mferred t0 pm"" and pOSt'LBNP [7], which could have reduced its usual increase in the
gs supine position during our preliminary investigation.

Moreover, the sub—aqua mask adopted to ﬁt the subject’s
with a mild reduction of the rod displacement during LBNP eyes into the SVA, could have also played a role in our
(—lo). ﬁnal test outcome, producing a further tactile orientation

cue.

In conclusion, although part of our ﬁndings are not in

Discussion agreement with some literature data, various aspects
strictly speciﬁc to our research can explain such results,

One of the targets of the preliminary part of this study was together with the well known high inter—subject variability
to replace the usual GIF reference point, adopted for the of the RFT.
standard SVV and RFT testing on Earth, with another However, for the purpose of this study, such results were
parameter being unaltered by the microgravity condition. in line with the behaVior of the cosmonaut who was sub—

The egocentric evaluation of the rod alignment with the sequently tested, as documented by his data in Table 2
subject’s LAS was identiﬁed as a reliable reference point (subject upright) and Table 3 (subject supine).
for such a purpose, as documented in Table l. A signiﬁcant contribution to orientation on the part of

Two speciﬁc aspects characterized our preliminary VM, which was the main aim of the present investigation,
investigation: the adoption of the LAS as the reference for could not be detected by this study.
rod alignment, and the lack of signiﬁcant changes between Furthermore, no increase of Visual ﬁeld dependence was
the erect and the supine test position, which may theoret— observed during the in—ﬁight sessions with respect to on
ically be in part a consequence of the previous point. Earth recordings.

The adoption of the LAS as the reference for rod This ﬁnding could be in agreement with the lack of
alignment was not observed in previous studies. In fact, signiﬁcant changes in our population between the erect and
Goodenough et al. [11, 12] asked their subjects to “set the the supine positions. In fact, an increase of 1.750 in rod tilt
rod orthogonal to the longitudinal aXis of the head”, secondary to frame lighting was recorded in the pre—ﬁight
Lichtenstein and Saucer [19] gave the instruction to “return testing, while only +l.00° was detected during the in—ﬁight
the rod to a position that would be equivalent to the vertical 1 analysis (Table 2).
in the erect position”, while Templeton asked to set the rod Similar data have also been found during the repetition
according to a line “extending from a point midway of the experiment in our laboratory: +2.00O adding the
between the shoulders to a point between the feet” [28]. frame in the pre—LBNP recording (Table 3).

Therefore, it can be concluded that the LAS criterion Theoretically, a subject totally dependent on the Visual
was an original aspect of this study, that could be easily ﬁeld would have inclined the rod to the same extent as the
applied by our subjects (cosmonauts included), and which frame (i.e. about 200 in this case), while a completely
could explain at least in part the differences observed from independent indiVidual would have kept the rod in the same
other literature data. position, independently by the presence of the frame. On

In fact, previous experiments carried out on Earth on Earth, intermediate results are usually obtained, and our
supine subjects showed that alignment errors were more cosmonaut was among those quite weakly inﬂuenced by
strongly affected by the presence of a surrounding Visual the frame, as documented by these data.
frame in such condition, if compared to the upright posture However, even with such a pre—ﬁight baseline data
[11, 12, 28], although such a ﬁnding was not conﬁrmed in collection, an increased tilt in the “rod —|— frame” analysis
all cases, as documented by the female group of Lichten— could be expected in microgravity, considering the lack of
stein and Saucer [19]. information from all competing GIF sensitive receptors,

Beside the adoption of the LAS as the reference point but this was not the case, as indicated in the comparison
for rod adjustment, one further possible cause of the lack in between pre—ﬁight and in—ﬁight 1 data (Table 2).

@ Springer

"
"8","1074 Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075
On the contrary, in the “rod —|— frame” analysis, a more Furthermore, very similar ﬁndings were observed during
correct rod alignment with the actual body aXis was the post—ﬁight session (Table 3).
recorded compared to pre—ﬁight data (—0.75°). An error increase with the “only rod” condition in
In our subject, an increase in Visual ﬁeld dependence in supine subjects was already reported by Goodenough et al.
the post—ﬁight session was not observed, and this is not in line [12], indicating a reduced capability in orientation per—
with the ﬁndings from Young et a1. [36], who reported such a ception when the subj ect is not upright. As such, a similar
ﬁnding in four cosmonauts, although with highinter—subject error increase in microgravity is not surprising, while its
variability. However, important differences Characterized reduction during LBNP could be an expression of an actual
the two studies, since they could examine their subjects VM contribution to the overall LAS.
immediately after re—entry to Earth and not only 3 days after, This correction of rod displacement during LBNP is in
as in our case. Moreover, in their study the reference point agreement with what was asserted by Vaitl et a1. [29], who
was the gravitational vertical and not the LAS. adopted identical but more prolonged LBNP variations to
Furthermore, in our study, additional sensory cues have test their subjects (i.e. —30 mmHg for 8—10 min). Never—
possibly contributed to a globally increased attitude infor— theless, in our case, the switch of the frame on completely
mation during the different test sessions, such as the altered the test performance and our subject did not eXhibit
shoulder straps used to wear the CHIBIS, or the contact of any further LBNP—induced change in his LAS.
its internal parts with the subject’s body. However, considering the limitations of a single case
Such a hypothesis can be related to the report from study, it is not possible to produce strong conclusions,
Carriot et a1. [4], who observed that pressure under the feet especially with data from a so poorly ﬁeld—dependent
was sufﬁcient to improve the accuracy of body z—aXis individual.
perception under microgravity induced by parabolic ﬂights. This discrepancy between the two analyses conducted in
Finally, the additional tactile information coming from this experiment (i.e. the “only rod” vs. the “rod —|— frame”
the SVA aqua—mask could have played a further role. one) could be due to an insufﬁcient test sensitiVity in a
Therefore, in contrast with our expectancy, this subject subject so Visually independent, to the tilted frame over—
did not change his RFT performance under microgravity, whelming LBNP effects, or to a substantial lack in our
and this signiﬁcantly reduced the possibility of detecting subject of signiﬁcant effects induced by VM activation.
further Changes due to additional orientation cues, as in the
case Of VM activation. Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict
AS a matter Of fact durin the in—ﬁi ht eX osure to of interest and that the research has been developed within the
. ’ . g g p capabilities of the Italian Air Force Medical Corps without sponsor—
LBNP, the frame induced a slightly larger effect on the rod ship Of any ﬁnancial organization.
setting errors than before and after LBNP (cfr. in—ﬁight 1
and 3 data from Table 2), which denotes a substantial lack
of inﬂuence on the RFT on the part of ﬂuid mass shifts, at References
least as far as the parameters of this study are concerned. . . .
. . . 1. Aok1 M, Ito Y, Burch111 P, Brookes GB, Gresty MA (1999) T11ted
In fact, a reduction of the frame inﬂuence on rod or1— . . . . . . .
. . _ _ pereept1on of the subjectwe upr1ght 1n un11atera1 loss of vest1bu1ar
entation was expected in this experimental step, due to the function. Am J Otol 203741447
hypothetical contribution from VM, 2. Aubert H (1861) Eine scheinbare bedeutende Drehung von Ob—
Such a ﬁnding was conﬁrmed a few months later by the jekten bei neigung des Kopfes naCh reChts oder links. Virchows
1 t E th d‘ (T b1 3) Arch 202381—393
as on at recor 1ngs a e ' . . . 3. Blackrnore C, Carpenter RH, Georgeson MA (1970) Lateral
Therefore, we can COHCIUde that m thlS experiment the inhibition between orientation detectors in the human Visual
hypothetical stimulus from VM could not reduce the dis— system. Nature 228:37—39
orienting effect induced by the frame, at least in this 4' cam“ J, Bhngoux L? Ch'f‘hes C Mars F NougTCr V? Clan C
. . . (2004) Perce1ved body or1entat1on 1n m1erograV1ty: effects of
1nd1V1dua1. . . . .
. . . pr1or exper1enee and pressure under the feet. AV1at Space EnV1ron
Nevertheless, another ﬁnd1ng resulted in agreement w1th Med 753795499
our expectancy, and was related to the rod orientation 5. Cheung BSK, Howard 1P, Money KE (1990) Visuallyindueedtilt
during the different “only rod” experimental steps. During dur1ng ParabOhC ﬂlghts‘ EXP Bram Res 813391—397
. . . . . 6. Clement G, Arnesen TN, Olsen MH, Sylvestre B (2007) Per—
the 1n—ﬁ1ght 1 sess1on, our subject showed an increased . . . . . . . .
. . . . . cept1on of long1tud1na1 body ax1s 1n m1erograV1ty dur1ng para—
error in CW direction (+3.50) With respect to the pre—ﬁight boliC ﬂight. Neurosci Lett 4133150453
recording. Although it could be at least in part explained by 7. Cullen JF, Harper CR, Kidera CJ (1969) Perceptual style differ—
a more difﬁcult SVA calibration under weightlessness, ences between airline Pm)“ and engineers‘ AerOSP MCd
. . . . . 40:407—408
3 Slloght reduction Of thlS tllt was dethaed dur1ng .LBNP 8. Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM, Dai MJ (1991) The acute effects of
(_1 ), Wlth a prompt 1""CCOVery dur1ng the 1h'h1ght 3 unilateral vestibular neurectomy on sensory and motor tests of
recording. human otolithic function. Aeta Otolaryngol Suppl 48125—10
@ Springer

"
"9","Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol (2011) 268:1067—1075 1075
9. DiLorenzo J, Rock I (1982) The rod and frame effect as a 25. Spinelli D, Antonueci G, Goodenough DR, Pizzamiglio L,
function of the righting 0f the frame. J Exp Psychol 8:536—546 Zoccolotti P (1991) Psychological mechanisms underlying the
10. Friederici AD, Levelt WJ (1990) Spatial reference in weight— rod and frame illusion. In: Wapner S, Demick J (eds) Field
lessness: perceptual factors and mental representations. Percept dependence—independence—cognitive style across the life span.
Psychophys 47:253—266 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, pp 37—59
11. Goodenough DR, Nowak A, Oltman PK, Cox PW, Sigman E 26. Spinelli D, Antonueci G, Daini R, Martelli M, Zoccolotti P
(1982) A Visually induced illusion of body tilt in a horizontal (1999) Hierarchical organisation in perception of orientation.
plane. Percept Psychophys 31(3):268—272 Perception 28:965—979
12. Goodenough DR,Oltman PK, Sigman E, COX PW(1981) The rod 27. Tabak S, Collewijn H, Boumans LJ (1997) Deviation of the
and frame illusion in erect and supine observers. Percept Psy— subjective vertical in long—standing unilateral vestibular loss.
Chophys 29(4):365—370 Acta Otolaryngol 11721—6
13. Goswami N, Loeppky JA, Hinghofer—Szalkay H (2008) LBNP: 28. Templeton WB (1973) The role of gravitational cues in the
past protocols and technical considerations for experimental judgement of Visual orientation. Percept Psychophys 14:451—457
design. Aviat Space Environ Med 79:459—471 29. Vaitl D, Mittelstaedt H, Baisch F (1997) Shifts in blood volume
14. Green EL, Jenkin HL, Howard IP (2002) Perception of self—tilt in alter the perception of posture. Int J Psychophysiol 27:99—105
a true and illusory vertical plane. Perception 31:1477—1490 30. Van NeChel C, Toupet M, Bodson I (2001) The subjective Visual
15. Howard IP (1982) Human Visual orientation. Wiley, Chichester vertical. In: Tran Ba Huy P, Toupet M (eds) Otolith function and
Sussex disorders. Karger, Basel, pp 77—87
16. Howard 1P, Groen EL, Jenkin H (1997) Visually induced self 31. Vibert D, Hausler R, Safran AB (2000) Subjective Visual vertical
inversion and levitation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 40:S801 in peripheral unilateral vestibular disease. J Vestib Res
17. J archow T, Wirz M, Haslwanter T, Dietz V, Straumann D (2003) 9:145—152
Perceived horizontal body position in healthy and paraplegic 32. Von Baumgarten RJ (1986) European vestibular experiments on
subjects: effect of centrifugation. J Neurophysiol 90:2973—2977 the Spacelab—l mission: 1. Overview. Exp Brain Res 64:239—246
18. Kornilova LN, Mueller CH, Chernobylski LM (1995) Phenom— 33. Von Gierke HE, Parker DE (1994) Differences in otolith and
enology of spatial orientation reactions under conditions of abdominal viscera graviceptor dynamics: implications for motion
weightlessness. Fiziolgiya Cheloveka 21:50 Translated in Human sickness and perceived body position. Aviat Space Environ Med
Physiology 21:344—51 65:747—751
19. Lichtenstein JH, Saucer RT (1974) Visual dependency in the 34. Wenderoth P, Beh H (1977) Component analysis of orientation
erect and supine positions. J Appl Psychol 59(4):529—531 illusions. Perception 6:57—75
20. Mittelstaedt H (1983) A new solution to the problem of the 35. Witkin HA, Asch SE (1948) Studies in space orientation. IV.
subjective vertical. Naturwissenschaften 702272—281 Further experiments on perception of the upright With displaced
21. Mittelstaedt H (1998) Origin and processing of postural infor— Visual ﬁelds. J Exp Psychol 38:762—782
mation. Neurosci BiobehaV ReV 22(4):473—478 36. Young LR, Shelhamer M, Modestino S (1986) M.I.T./Canadian
22. Mittelstaedt H (1996) Somatic graviception. Biol Psychol vestibular experiments on the Spacelab—l mission: 2. Visual
42:53—74 vestibular interaction in weightlessness. Exp Brain Res
23. Oman CM, Cizaire C, Natapoff A, Aoki H, Buckland DA, Liu 64:299—307
AM (2008) Effect of docked spacecraft conﬁguration on spatial
orientation. Aviat Space Environ Med 79: abstr. 507
24. Reschke MF, Bloomberg JJ, Harm DL, Paloski WH (1994) Space
ﬂight and neurovestibular adaptation. J Clin Pharmacol
34:609—617
@ Springer

"
