"","x"
"1","STATUS OF US NATIONAL LABORATORY ON THE ISS
Mark L. Uhran
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, DC 20003, USA
ABSTRACT includes use of the ISS to develop, demonstrate, and
deliver spacecraft technologies, biomedical
The International Space Station (ISS) is rapidly approaching the countermeasures, and operational knowledge that Will
long-awaited completlon 0f assernbly. A11 Unlted States (US) enable humans to withstand the rigors of space and permit
core elements have been integrated and tested on-orbit, and the more ambitious long-duration exploration missions. In
European and Japanese laboratories were successfully deployed addition the 2005 Authorization Act mandated that some
earlier this year. The fully envisioned conﬁguration is on ’ . . .
schedule to be completed as planned by the end of US non-exploratlon oriented ISS research .continue 10 be
government ﬁscal year 2010 S ection 507 Of the N AS A maintained by the space agency. While this combination of
Authorization Act of 2005 designated the US segment of the ISS research committed NASA as the anchor tenant 9 1t 9150
as a “national laboratory”, thereby opening up its use to other Us freed up ISS resources (e.g., power, coolmg,
government agencies, US private ﬁrms and US non-proﬁt communications...) and accommodations (e.g., laboratory
institutions. This paper reports on progress toward identifying space and external attachment sites) over and above NASA
and entering into agreements with entities outside of NASA that mission needs.
plan to use the ISS in the post-assernbly tirnefrarne. The original
1984 Vision of a robust, rnulti-rnission space station serving as a The Act also designates the US portion of the ISS as a
platform for the advancement of US science, technology and 6‘ . ,, .
in dustry will soon be achieved. national laboratory to be made available for use by US
public and private entities. Through this approach,
INTRODUCTION research and development (R&D) that is not relevant to the
NASA mission can be pursued by those organizations
The International Space Station (ISS) constitutes a whose own .aCthltICS. W111. directly beneﬁt. NASA has
partnership among the nations of Canada Europe Japan embraced this legislative directive and launched a broad
Russia and the United States (US) to cooperate 0n the ISS applications development initiatiye as. a result. This
design, development, operation and utilization of a paper summarizes NASA progress in. ,thls, regard, and
p erman ently 0 c cupi e (1 civil sp a c e station. As s e mbly b e g an rliscusses the prospects for productive utilization of the ISS
with the ﬁrst element launched in November 1998, and the in the post-assembly timeframe.
ISS has been permanently crewed since November 2000. . .
The ﬁnal assembly mission, STS-l30, is scheduled for the Encounters Wlth US government agenCIes have been very
1st quarter of calendar year 2010 and the last major positive relative to their potential use 0fthe ISS. To date, a
assembly elements node 3 and a acupola are awaiting ﬁrm interest in the use of ISS has been demonstrated in the
launch at the Spac e Station Pro 0 essin g Facility, Kennedy areas of education, human health related research, plant
S p a ce Center and animal related research, and defense-related bas10
sciences. In Section 2: Progress to Date, the speciﬁc
In a major space policy address on January 14, 2004, US actions tal<en by EASA and, th: reslporlisesb from these
President George W. Bush directed NASA to focus its ?mmunities .are iscusse [:11 etaih. n 77:]; a [1
future human space exploration activities on a return to the over n m en t m t er 'aan cy t as . force as provz e fl f“
Moon as prelude to future human missions to Mars and report on the potential for usmg ISS to advance sczence,
beyond. The NASA Authorization Act of 2005 (hereafter technology, engineering and math (STEM education a]
called the Act) also called for this renewed emphasis on 01926 CUZQS’. NJ” em 077m? 0f Under—sthZ/zdzgzi betvgeenhNAgjé
space exploration. Included in this new national “Vision cg; t e atloza . rgsntutes 0f eaht 13; h t 6b
for Space Exploration”, are plans to complete assembly of .epartment 0f grzcu t W e on “S e of t e. . ave een
the ISS and retire the Space Shuttle ﬂeet by the end of szgned; and,f0ur Space A“ Agreements Wlth przvateﬁrms
ﬁscal y e ar (FY) 2010 and one with a state university have been completed.
Along with 0 one entratin g N AS A sp a c e syst e ms As these activities progress, NASA remains conﬁdent that
development and operation efforts on space exploration, further applications Of 188 .capabilities will emerge. in
the US research mission for the ISS also was re-evaluated parallel Wlth the. reduction in perceived HSkS 33¢ng
and subsequently re-focused primarily on requirements- from: (1) completion Of ISS assenibly; and, (2) availability
driven, exploration oriented, research. This research Of next generation commermal space transportation
services. This reduction in risk will be key to the
identiﬁcation of sources of funding for non-NASA use of
the ISS.
* Correspondence to: Mark L. Uhran
I‘VVatlinaltAerCSIEuZtgzgoegneljgiace Administration 1 Section 507, National Laboratory Designation, NASA Authorization
as.1.ng 0n, Act of 2005, Public Law 109-155, enacted December 30, 2005 (“US
Email. mark.l.uhran@nasa.g0v portion of the ISS” includes both US elements and US rights of access to
Phone: 202'358'2233 international elements as deﬁned in the ISS Memoranda of Understanding
with the International Partners).
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 67

"
"2","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the 188
an '1 ,.._I.1II
”lilﬂ; "",_.' _. .1 I .-
hk ' {h . -L E“ i -- .-
, , $3 in H...
_r- ' I i J"" .
LE“

NASA is carefully considering the operations plan during PROGRESS TO DATE

the ISS post-assembly period. Before determining ﬁnal

details of management structures and processes, it Will be Completion of the ISS assembly phase is now appearing

important to reasonably deﬁne the scope of future 188 clearly on the horizon in FY 2010. During 2006, the

applications. The nature of research is such that discovery NASA Ofﬁce of Space Operations therefore launched an

can inﬂuence outcomes at any point in an endeavor. The applications development initiative directed toward US

low-Earth orbit environment in Which the ISS resides is a public and private sector organizations having potential

very unique and relatively new human domain of activity; uses for the 188 as a national laboratory. In the context of

hence the opportunity for discovery remains rich and the this initiative,

effect on evolution of a national laboratory must be NASA is seeking partnerships with other government

compatible in terms of management structures and agencies... as well as the commercial sector to conduct

processes. research onboard the ISS”.2

The form of the 188 National Laboratory management In order to organize and expeditiously address the

structure Will depend on the functional breadth of the challenge of transition from the assembly phase to a

organization. Several models of successful management national laboratory utilization phase, it was ﬁrst necessary

systems, as well as more tailored approaches, are under to step back and consider future 188 schedule milestones

consideration by NASA and the NASA Advisory Council. that Will affect the operation and longevity of the facility

Flexibility remains important at this early stage. Several and its various components. Within this context, the

strategic considerations must be addressed, such as the objective became clearly deﬁned and constraints were

need for NASA to continue as the executive agent for established from national policy and technical

integrating interests of other US government agencies that perspectives. Development of an executable strategy

might not be inclined to work With a third party entity followed that included a series of near term tactical

When seeking access to a US government asset. NASA initiatives for achieving the objective. As a result of the

also Will continue to explore the beneﬁts of an associated work accomplished over the 2006—2009 period, NASA has

non-proﬁt, 0r for-proﬁt, management entity for non- made a number of ﬁndings that can guide the future

government access to the 188, in the event it becomes a development and evolution of a framework for 188

valuable feature in the evolving private sector space

economy. 2 Written Statement of Michael D. Grifﬁn, NASA Administrator, before
the Subcommittee on Science and Space, Committee on Commerce,
Science and Transportation United States Senate, Apri125, 2006.

68 Gravitational and Space Biology 23 (2) August 2010

"
"3","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS
National Laboratory operations. The following sections for ISS utilization at the conclusion of assembly operations
discuss each of these aspects. in 2010.
Each of the major future milestones discussed above are
Schedule Milestones illustrated in the below ﬁgure.
The design life of US ISS elements is deﬁned in system Objective and Constraints
speciﬁcations as 15 years from the time of deployment of
the element on orbit. Since elements are deployed Over the past decade, several program ofﬁces at NASA
sequentially during the assembly period, the launch of the headquarters have examined and evaluated the possible
US Laboratory Destiny, in February 2001, is most uses of the ISS in the post-assembly timeframe. Explicit in
frequently cited as the nominal reference point for these studies were corresponding “utilization manage-
beginning the ISS “lifetinie”.3 Formal US life cycle costing ment” structures and alternative approaches to recruiting,
studies to date have thus reﬂected FY 2016 as the selecting, ﬁnancing, producing and performing utilization
corresponding milestone for completion of program missions on the ISS. Numerous expert sources were also
operations. Nonetheless, past operating experience with consulted and their ﬁndings thoroughly documented. As a
both human-rated and robotic spacecraft clearly indicates result, an extensive body of work is readily available to
that systems are capable of performing safely and inform NASA’s current initiative.
effectively for well beyond their original design lifetime.
Service life can be extended dependent on actual operating Explicit in all prior efforts were statements of objective. In
experience, and the selected approach to maintenance and reviewing this history, a persistent theme emerges that is
refurbishment. In the case of the ISS, this fact is consistent with the current policy to operate a portion of
recognized by general guidance from the NASA the ISS as a national laboratory. This common objective
Administrator to take no steps that would preclude the can be summarized as:
operation of the ISS beyond 2016. The ISS program, in Develop a diversiﬁed portfolio ofproductive research and
turn, is proceeding with the analyses necessary to extend development projects that exploit the unique attributes of
service life if warranted. the ISS and contribute to US scientiﬁc and technological
leadership and economic growth.
Operation of the Destiny laboratory beyond 2016 would
require extension of the certiﬁed design lifetime. The In the course of pursuing this objective, a limited set of
critical path for continued operation of the ISS as a agency constraints must also be taken into consideration.
coherent entity also would have to be evaluated in the The assigned NASA mission for the ISS is to enable
broader context of the non-US element design lifetimes. exploration—driven research. Thus, NASA uses of the
Since these steps could require analyses, tests or related Station to enable the exploration mission must command
actions at additional cost, decisions on whether or not to top priority. Since the ISS was originally designed to
pursue service life extension options will be required no accommodate multiple, concurrent missions, its capability
later than 2014. This will allow sufﬁcient lead-time to is robust and non-NASA mission objectives can also be
conduct the work needed to validate any lifetime supported.
extension. Such a decision would be rationally based on a
determination of the beneﬁt and cost prospects for Due to the ﬁscal challenges of mounting a human and
extended ISS operations at that time. Options available for robotic space exploration program, while also sustaining a
re-supply logistics and maintenance would be important Vigorous aeronautics research program, NASA must
factors, as would be the desires and capabilities rigorously apply all available spending authority to its own
international partners. Agency mission. For this reason, funds necessary to carry
out the missions of other public or private entities must be
Considering that Station assembly is scheduled to be funded by those entities, so to not impact the primary
complete by the end of FY 2010, a four-year period then missions of NASA.
exists during which the ISS will be able to demonstrate its
value as a national laboratory, or as a platform for further As operators of the ISS and stewards of this new national
NASA mission applications. Four years (FYs 2011 — 2014) laboratory asset, the space agency remains committed to
represents a relatively short operations period considering covering the annual cost of ISS operations for as long as
the lead times necessary to deﬁne, ﬁnance, organize and the beneﬁts to the nation are justiﬁable The Agency is also
produce high-Value, space-based missions. Therefore, it resolved to employ the ISS for research on human
becomes critical that judicious steps be taken during the physiology, in order to enable longer human space ﬂight
ﬁnal years of assembly, in order to be operationally ready missions for the future.
— Strategy and Tactical Initiatives
3 In practice, the design lifetime is assessed for each ISS element as it
becomes due. For instance, Since the FGB and Node 1 were deployed in The principal element necessary to successful operation of
1998,.their certiﬁcation expires in. 2013 and they will also need to be the ISS as a national laboratory is a body Of external
recertiﬁed for an extended serV1ce life.
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 69

"
"4","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS
organizations that are knowledgeable and prepared to opportunities that ‘light the ﬁre’ and ‘fuel the passion’for
undertake and fund missions in space, i.e., qualiﬁed end- a new culture ofleaming and achievement in STEM”.6
users. Therefore, while continuing to deﬁne and evaluate
potential management structures for the national Stimulating youth to pursue STEM education with a View
laboratory, the NASA strategy is to focus early efforts on toward careers in scientiﬁc and technological vocations
identifying qualiﬁed end-users from the public and private represents a growing national challenge. As recently
sectors. In order to ensure Visibility and sustain advocacy pointed out by the NASA Advisory Council, such
at the highest levels of NASA leadership, the ISS stimulation of the “best and the brightest” of the nation is
applications development initiative is being directed at the particularly critical to the Agency’s and the Nation’s
headquarters level by the Associate Administrator for future. The exploration of space has consistently been an
Space Operations, and is under the direct cognizance of the area of fascination and excitement for young minds, and
NASA Administrator. The NASA Advisory Council is the ISS represents the most recent US government
also actively engaged through periodic reView and program to bring the stimulus of human space ﬂight into
assistance in opening dialog with Viable end-user classrooms at all levels of the educational system. During
communities, as well as in providing independent the ﬁrst 10 expeditions to the ISS, almost a million
evaluations of potential management structures and students participated in some form of educational project
processes. involving interaction with the station or astronaut crew.
Successful educational projects have ranged from
Due to the complexity and potential hazards of space ﬂight classroom versions of experiments to “Saturday morning
endeavors, written agreements are employed to deﬁne key science” hosted live by the ISS Science Ofﬁcer. In the case
aspects of all relationships. In the US public sector, of televised educational demonstrations, over 30 million
Agency-to-Agency Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) students have had the opportunity to receive downlinks
are used, while Space Act agreements (SAAs) accomplish from the ISS that are broadcast Via networks across the
a similar purpose for private sector arrangements. Close country.
review of all agreements is coordinated with the NASA
headquarters Ofﬁce of General Counsel on legal aspects, In recognition of the ISS potential for expanding the
and the ISS Program Ofﬁce in Houston, Texas reViews and STEM educational impact, the NASA Ofﬁce of Education
validates all technical requirements involving the use of established an interagency task force consisting of
government furnished equipment and facilities, ISS representatives from the educational ofﬁces of siX US
physical accommodations, and ISS utilization resources government agencies.7 The task force’s deliberations were
during the pre-ﬂight, on-orbit and post-ﬂight phases of the further informed by consultations with members of a wide
mission. variety of private sector educational associations and
industry trade groups. Meeting regularly over the 2006-
The tactical initiatives that support this strategy fall into 2008 period, the task force evaluated future prospects for
three general categories, each of which are discussed use of the ISS as an educational asset in their ongoing
below: programs. In collaboration, an ISS National Laboratory
- Public/Private Sector Initiative in Education; Education Concept Development Report was produced, in
- Public Sector Initiative in Research; and which the task force concluded from its ﬁrst phase of
- Private Sector Initiative in Applications. discussions that,
“there is Signiﬁcant interest among Federal agencies in
Education Initiative the opportunity to further develop the ISS as an asset for
education. ”8
In the year following passage of the Act designating the
US segment of the ISS as a national laboratory, the US During the second phase, the task force identiﬁed a series
Congress also passed the America COMPETES Act.4 This of speciﬁc candidate educational projects; a process for
legislation is based on the belief that US progress in STEM selection; a concept of operations, and; metrics by which
education is weakening and that the implications for future to assess effectiveness. This was captured in their second
US economic growth and national security are profound.5 report that concluded,
The space agency shares in this growing concern, “...this eﬁ’ort in many respects served as a pilot projectfor
“Accordingly, we are preparing the pathway for the next the exciting educational opportunities that will be
generation with great anticipation. T hese explorers and available in the future and that will utilize the ISS as a
innovators 0f the new millennium ’ mustfally represent our national laboratory. ”9
Nation’s vibrant and rich diversity. Furthermore, we will —
support our Nation ’S universities, colleges and com-munity 6 Written Statement of Shana Dale, NASA Deputy Administrator, before
colleges by providing exciting re-seareh and internship the Committee on Scienee,House ofRepresentatives,March 30,2006.
Department of Education, National Seience Foundation, Department of
— Energy, Department of Defense, National Institutes of Health, and
4 America COMPETES Act, Public Law 110-69, Title II, Section 2006, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Use of ISS National Laboratory to Support Math and Science Education 8 ISS National Laboratory Education Concept Development Report,
and Competitiveness, enacted August 9, 2007. December 2006.
5 Rising Above The Gathering Storm, Report by the National Research 9 An Opportunity to Educate: International Space Station National
Council Committee on Science, Engineering and Public Policy, 2005. Laboratory, March 2008.
70 Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010

"
"5","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS
! .i!_:;:. f‘i - . -. 'i .: -; '5 -.
mmmmmmmmm
Over and above the need to develop educational content, US Department of Agriculture (USDA). As a result of the
the capability to transport student equipment and collateral December 2006 meeting, NASA and NIH signed an MOU
educational materials was examined at length. It was clear in September 2007 that provides a framework for NIH to
that the avail—ability of space transportation services and encourage use of the 188 as a national laboratory in order
the funds with which to acquire such services are the to,
principal challenges to expanding a high—Value ISS “.“facilitate Space-related research and to integrate
education program. results from that research into an improved understanding
ofhumcm physiology and human health. ”10
Research Initiative Subsequent to the MOU, NIH began working on a funding
opportunity announcement (FDA) for space station based
US government agencies are strong contributors to research that was released in Spring 2009.
research in areas germane to their respective missions. The
188, in turn, offers a unique and only recently accessible The Agricultural Research Service (ARS), an agency of
natural environment in which to conduct scientiﬁcally the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), also became
relevant experiments across the biological, chemical and deeply interested in pursuing cellular and molecular level
physical research spectrum. Prior space experiments bio—technology studies on the space station in the area of
conducted under NASA sponsorship, and frequently plant and animal sciences. Initial meetings were conducted
involving other government agency investigators, have in the Fall 2007, and by July 2008 an MOU was signed
produced positive results that suggest the opportunity for between NASA and USDA. The purpose of this MOU is
meaningful advances in a variety of ﬁelds. However, these to,
ﬁelds are not all closely associated with NASA’s recently “...facilitate Space-related research and to integrate the
focused mission of space exploration. results from that microgravity research into an improved
understanding ofplcmt and animal biology... ”11
In recognition of the potential value of the 188 to support
missions of other US government agencies, the NASA The USDA ARS conducted a workshop of its national
Administrator issued a letter of inVitation to the US program leaders in February 2009 for the purpose of
Secretaries of Energy and Commerce, and to the Directors deﬁning an experimental survey program that can be
of the NIH and the NSF. A response was received on the conducted on the 188 in the post—assernbly timeframe.
behalf of the NIH Director. Based on the positive results of During this workshop, research obj ectives including gene
prior space biotechnology research, coupled with NASA’s transfer efﬁciency, gene function discovery, biornarker
ongoing program in human biomedical research, the discovery, Viral biodynamics and nutrient bio—availability
Chairman and members of the NASA Advisory Council were determined to be high priorities
(NAC) organized a multi—agency meeting in December
2006 on “Space Related Health Research”. The goals of In addition to scientiﬁc research pursuits under ciVilian
the NIH—hosted event were to share information across key programs, NASA maintains a close ongoing relationship
Federal agencies about space—related health research with allied interests in the defense sciences research
interests and activities, and to identify potential community. Each year a Space Experiments Review Board
opportunities for collaboration to facilitate future research. (SERB) meets to evaluate and recommend candidates for
Representatives from ﬁve Federal agencies attended to
hear about research opportunities on the 188 in the new 10—_ _ _

. . . . Memorandum of Understandlng between the Nat10nal Instltutes of
r016 as a natlonal laboratory During a round robin 363310119 Health and NASA for Cooperation in Space-Related Health Research,
over a dozen brieﬁngs were offered on current areas of September 2007_
applicable research’ and future interest areas of the NIH9 11 MOU Between US Department Of Agriculture, Agricultural Research
NSF, FOOd and Drug Administration (FDA), NIST, and the Service and NASA for Cooperation in Space-Related Biological and

EnV1ronmental Research, July 2008.
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 71

"
"6","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS
future US Department of Defense (DOD) space missions support system. Rather than develop this important future
under the Space Test Program (STP). During the capability under a government-funded program, NASA
November 2006 meeting of the SERB, the ISS National competitively solicited and in Spring ‘08 awarded a
Laboratory opportunity was reViewed by military leaders contract to Hamilton-Sundstrand for water production
from all serVices. NASA re-afﬁrmed its commitment to serVices on the ISS. This contract is designed to expand the
continue to accommodate DOD scientiﬁc research in market for commercially supplied serVices to the ISS
accordance with existing defense policy guidance. To date, National Laboratory.
the STP has ﬁelded multiple missions employing the ISS,
and further missions remain on the drawing board In addition, NASA continues to explore the potential for
scheduled for future ﬂight opportunities”. agreements with private sector ﬁrms that involve use of
ISS accommodations and resources as test beds for
For both ciVil and defense agencies involved in research engineering research, molecular biology, tissue culturing,
and development (R&D), there is a thorough bone de-mineralization, antibiotics and vaccine production,
understanding of the technical challenges associated with plant genetics, combustion synthesis, and ultrahigh
design, development and operation of space-based vacuum and microgravity pro-cessing of materials.
missions. In the case of the ISS, funding for space Numerous discussions have taken place on topics as broad
transportation serVices remains the single greatest barrier ranging as biotechnology products, electric propulsion,
to ﬁelding a productive public sector program in research. laser-optic communications and wireless power
Transportation can represent the greatest cost component transmission. However, it remains largely premature to
in space R&D; thus, the availability of funds to acquire identify commercial end-users that are fully prepared to
transportation serVices will directly affect the success of undertake the risks associated with future space missions.
ISS as a national laboratory in the years to come. This perception of risk is closely related to two factors: (1)
remaining challenges in the ISS assembly process; and, (2)
uncertainty in the future price and availability of space
transportation serVices. As these uncertainties fall away
Applications Initiative toward the end of the decade, conﬁdence may rise and
private sector interest in use of the ISS National
There are numerous forums engaged in advocating Laboratory may then develop.
commercial space development in an effort to stimulate a
new space economy. All involved recognize the pivotal Nonetheless, NASA continues to participate directly in
role that afford-able space transportation plays in closing discussions with private ﬁrms and host sessions under the
the business case for any private sector venture. To this sponsorship of industry trade associations. This was
end, NASA has committed $500 million toward the demonstrated by NASA attendance at a May 2006
demonstration of commercial orbital transportation “Commercial Space Forum”, organized by the California-
serVices (COTS), and created a government market for based Alliance for Commercial Enterprise in Space, and in
such serVices by the demand inherent in maintenance and NASA’s organization of a January ‘07 “Special Session on
utilization of the ISS National Laboratory. Consistent with ISS a New National Laboratory” at the 45th Annual
this initiative, NASA later awarded two contracts for Aerospace Sciences Meeting, which was sponsored by the
Cargo Re-supply Services (CRS) to the ISS in December American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. A
2008. “Workshop on Use of the ISS” was also conducted at the
Ames Research Center (ARC) in October 2007. Nobel
Increasing the frequency and predictability of access to laureate, Dr. Baruch Blumberg, chaired this event, which
space, in order to sustain consistent progress toward a brought together disparate thought leaders to consider the
research objective, has proven to be a necessary prospects for ISS R&D. As a result of these outreaches
requirement for success. NASA looks forward to COTS activities, interest has gradually risen among US private
demonstrations and CRS by the end of this decade that will ﬁrms and non-proﬁt institutions.
satisfy this requirement.
In September 2007, NASA issued an announcement of
The model of procuring commercial serVices, instead of “Opportunity for Use of the ISS by US Non-government
ﬁnancing government-developed systems, is emerging Entities for R&D and Industrial Processing Purposes”.
strongly now that the COTS approach is setting the This announcement led to the signing of three Space Act
precedent. Based on this promise of success, NASA also Agreements (SAAs) by late Spring 2008. Two of the
decided to create an opportunity for commercial water SAA’s are with private ﬁrms engaged in the development
production serVices on the ISS utilizing the Sabatier of speciﬁc bio-technology products. It is interesting to note
process for recovery of carbon dioxide and hydrogen that, in both cases, the private ﬁrms also hold Cooperative
efﬂuents from the station’s environmental control and life Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs) with
other US government agencies. The third SAA is with a
— state university that provides payload integration and
12 Basic scientiﬁc research sponsored by the US Department of Defense is operations services based on eXisting payload facilities
undertaken cons1stent w1th the Intergovemmental Agreement on use of alread d6 10 ed 011 orbit in the US laborat
the ISS for peacefulpurposes. y p y ory.
72 Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010

"
"7","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS
- Academic semr 158 NW me ‘W'mm ”.%EE§£::€HEEE
- [ﬂ-ﬂﬂill‘lﬂl SHEEP Eﬂ-Uiﬂl‘ Nﬂﬂlﬂﬂ'h _ min ‘3‘“. w::ﬂ::l:;:l:u:;:t:i~i‘:
- ﬁuvernmlant Sattnr ’“F'” “Wu“ “'""“'“' 3“"": 5F""
Il-hrrﬂllp .1. :mtlnl. m.
nu ? am
‘1— FRADA {_'ﬂ_.1.]}_1 -—-+
5m 5.4.51.
3.1m; -
N'ﬁfm
5M ii I 5M
[pendingl
nu 3mm \.
/ 1551'? H.
LEASE
SEER rm.
These SAA’s are considered “pathﬁnders” in the new funds, and plans to enter into a formal SAA with NASA
model for operating a portion of the US share of the 188 as for use of the 188 in the post—assernbly timeframe.
a national laboratory. While the SAA’s are intended
primarily for R&D to be conducted during the 188 post— NASA also has also signed a SAA with the Ad Astra
assembly period (i.e., 2011 and beyond), the agreements Rocket Company (AARC) to deploy an electric propulsion
also provide very limited ﬂight opportunities within test bed on the 188. This proj ect would seek to demonstrate
existing US allocations on the ﬁnal ten ﬂights of the Space Ad Astra’s variable speciﬁc impulse magnetoplasma
Shuttle ﬂeet. Copies of each SAA are available at the ISS rocket (VASIMR) technology.14 While this potentially
science website in the public domain.13 innovative propulsion system has been under development
for over twenty years, the next logical step in evolution is
In January 2008, a self—organizing entity began to take demonstration in the space environment. NASA and
form in southern California as a direct result of the ARC AARC hope to deploy the VASIMR test bed on the 188 by
workshop the previous October. By May 2008, a 2014 and thus enable such a demonstration.
“Biotechnology Space Research Alliance” (BSRA) was
formally founded through execution of an MOU among SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
the participating parties. These parties included the
University of California at San Diego Colleges of The period from 2006—2009 was a very active in terms of
Engineering and Health Sciences; the Howard Hughes implementing an applications development initiative
Medical Institute Under—graduate Science Education consistent with designation of the 188 as a new national
Program; the BIOCOM Institute (operating arm of the laboratory. In order to sustain progress, it will be important
516—mernber biotechnology industries association) and; the to recognize and directly address the rate—limiting
San Diego Regional Economic Development Corporation. parameters that are applicable for each of the tactical
This strategic alliance has set a goal for southern initiatives:
California to become the global leader in space—based
biotechnology. The Alliance intends to ﬁnance their R&D — The Public/Private Sector Initiative in Education will
program through a combination of public and private require clear support between the US executive and
legislative branches of government. Fortunately, the cost
13http://www.nasa. gov/mission_pages/station/science/nlab/indexhtml 14 http ://www.adastrarocket.com/VASIMRhtml
Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010 73

"
"8","M.L. Uhran — Status of US National Laboratory on the ISS

of ﬁnancing educational projects is an order-of-magnitude and diverse, a new management structure may be most

less than most R&D efforts. Nonetheless, some marginal effective.

new funding to the sponsoring agencies will be critical to

purchase space transportation serVices and collateral At this stage, a credible network of ISS user organizations,

materials necessary to reap the potential for STEM beyond NASA, is coming together based on the recent and

educationalbeneﬁts 0n the ISS. planned MOUs and SAAs with interlocking CRADAs.
The payload physical integration capacity is also evolving

- The Public Sector Initiative in Research will be paced by well, with major nodes in both a university (i.e., the

ongoing evaluations made by US government agencies. University of Colorado’s, Bioserve Space Technologies)

Once again, new spending authority for sponsoring and state government (i.e., the State of Florida’s Space

agencies may be critical to acquire the space transportation Life Sciences Laboratory) The status of this network as is

serVices and support research initiatives with promising depicted in the below ﬁgure. Federal, state and local

prospects for contributing new knowledge. governments are participating along with private ﬁrms,
universities and non-proﬁt organizations. All of the

- For the Private Sector Initiative in Applications, progress necessary ingredients are coalescing on schedule for a

is dependent on a reduction in the perception of risk due to highly productive ISS post-assembly phase.

remaining assembly challenges, and the cost and

availability of space transportation ser-Vices. As these

milestones are achieved and perceptions change, business

cases can close at acceptable risk levels for products and

serVices commercially supplied, instead of government

developed.

The rate-limiting parameters for success are not related to

the ability to form public, or private, partnerships -- NASA

has the necessary instruments of agreement (e.g., MOUs,

SAAs, contracts, grants, cooperative agreements), and has

consistently demonstrated the ability to apply these tools

effectively in cases where mutual beneﬁts and

responsibilities can be identiﬁed. Once the range of

qualiﬁed and committed end-users becomes clear, the

management structure can be tailored to meet speciﬁc

needs, and leverage to the maximum degree practical

existing management practices of respective end-users.

NASA, in close coordination with the NAC, will continue

to examine future options for management structures in

parallel with end-user identiﬁcation. The availability of an

experienced workforce and ground-based assets is,

likewise, not a pacing item. These resources can be applied

on a ease-by-case basis in accordance with speciﬁc needs

and terms of partnership agreements.

The rate-limiting parameter for success is affordable and

reliable space transportation services to and from the ISS.

The availability of funds to purchase transportation

serVices will directly affect the ability of the ISS to operate

as a national laboratory in the years to come. In the

absence of such funding, uses will be limited to the

achievement of space exploration mission objectives that

are to be accomplished within the NASA budget. In order

to fully evolve in the capacity of a national laboratory,

public funds will have to be made available to other US

government agencies and private investments will be

needed to pursue non-government objectives.

As the plan for operating the ISS as a national laboratory

evolves, the composition of the end-user communities will

affect the outcome. The future management structure will

rationally reﬂect practices of the public and private sector

sponsors of ISS missions. If the range of sponsors is broad

74 Gravitational and Space Biology 23(2) August 2010

"
