"","x"
"1","Testing of Large Diameter Fresnel Optics for Space Based Observations
of
Extensive Air Showers
J ames H. Adams, Mark J . Christl and Roy M. Young
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
The J EM-EUSO mission Will detect extensive air showers produced by extreme energy
cosmic rays. It operates from the ISS looking down 011 Earth’s night time atmosphere to
detect the nitrogen ﬂuorescence and Cherenkov produce by the charged particles in the
EAS. The J EM-EUSO science obj ectives require a large ﬁeld of View, sensitivity to
energies below 50 EeV, and must ﬁt Within available 188 resources. The J EM-EUSO
optic module uses three large diameter, thin plastic lenses With Fresnel surfaces to meet
the instrument requirements. A bread-board model of the optic has been manufactured
and has undergone preliminary tests. We report the results of optical performance tests
and evaluate the present capability to manufacture these optical elements.
32nd International Cosmic Ray Conference
Beijing, China
August 11-18, 20]]

"
"2","Testing of Large Diameter Fresnel Optics for Space Based Observations of
Extensive Air Showers
The J EM-EUSO mission will detect extensive air showers produced by extreme energy
cosmic rays. It operates from the ISS looking down on Earth’s night time atmosphere to
detect the nitrogen ﬂuorescence and Cherenkoy produce by the charged particles in the
EAS. The J EM-EUSO science objectives require a large ﬁeld of View, sensitivity to
energies below 50 EeV, and must ﬁt within available 188 resources. The J EM-EUSO
optic module uses three large-diameter, thin plastic lenses with Fresnel surfaces to meet
the instrument requirements. A bread-board model of the optic has been manufactured
and has undergone preliminary tests. We report the results of optical performance tests
and evaluate the present capability to manufacture these optical elements.
Introduction
The J EM-EUSO mission uses a large telescope attached on the 188 to observe
Extreme-Energy Cosmic Rays (EECR) incident on Earth’s nighttime atmosphere that
produce Extensive Air Showers (EAS). The Optics Module (OM) for J EM-EUSO
consists of 3 2.5m diameter Fresnel lenses made from polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA).
The unique OM design provides a large ﬁeld of View (i300) and sensitivity to low photon
ﬂux phenomena in the near UV (330nm to 400nm) to adequate measure key properties of
the EASs.
The present level of maturity of the OM has been achieved by designing and
manufacturing test articles of the OM including 100m, 200m, 400m and 1m. Recently, a
1.5m diameter breadboard model (BBM) of the OM, with a ﬂight like design, was
completed. The BBM includes two double-sided curved Fresnel lenses (front and rear)
and a single ﬂat lens (middle) with one Fresnel and one diffractive surface. Each lens was
mounted in a frame structure and installed in a metering structure that provides proper
spacing and alignment of the lenses, aperture stop and detector (Figl). The testing
completed thus far on the BBM includes transmission and focusing of the BBM. These
key performance factors have been simulated using commercial optical design software
tools and custom routines developed for the J EM-EUSO OM. An evaluation of the
current manufacturing parameters used during the BBM fabrication was also completed.
1- r' ‘ “uh? 1"""" '
. f _ -_ _ E __ ___.. ._ ‘
:7 '1 ) t

Fig 1. Picture of one lens (Left) and the BBM system assembled (Right)

"
"3","Transmission measurements

The transmission of the BBM lens was measured using a parallel beam produced
by a parabolic mirror with a focal length of 2m and diameter of 60 cm. A light source
pallet was assembled for transmission measurements using a laser diode (LD) with a
wavelength of 405nm, focusing optics, a single mode optical ﬁber (<100 microns
diameter) and an attenuation ﬁlter. The LD output was focused on to one end of the ﬁber
optic and the other end was positioned at the mirror’s focal point. A neutral density ﬁlter
with OD 3.0 was used to reduce the intensity of the beam. The resulting collimated beam
was circular with a azimuthally symmetric guassian shaped intensity proﬁle and a half
intensity width of 12.3 cm. The intensity of the collimated beam was measured using a
power meter (Newport model 918D-UV-OD3). The transmission of the front lens was
measured with normal incidence at 5 positions along the radial direction offset from the
optical aXis: offset = 0 cm (optical axis), 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 cm. These measurements
included surface reﬂection losses at each surface, absorption within the lens material
(nominal thickness of 1.5 cm), scattering at the surfaces due to residual surface roughness
resulting during the manufacturing process and the obscuration resulting from the several
baok—outs that deﬁne the different Fresnel zones on the lens. The front lens performance
was simulated to determine the best focal position to measure the transmitted power.
Simulations show the focal length of the front lens alone is 580 cm. The image formed at
this position is not a sharp point but is diffuse with the maj ority of light falling within a
spot <lom diameter. The transmitted power was measured at several different depths to
identify the focal position. The resulting dependence was weakly dependent on the depth
of focus within a few centimeters of the predicted optimal position. The results of the
measured transmission are given in table 1.The measured transmission value of 69% at
30 offset should be compared with the results predicted by simulations incorporating the
detailed characterization of the BBM lens that predicts ???.

Power (%)
_——_
———_

Image focus performance

The focusing power of the BBM OM (all three lenses) was studied using a sub-
apeture exposure to the collimated beam produced by the parabolic mirror as well as a
full aperture exposure using an extended source. The sources used during testing included
the LD at 405nm and a broadband xenon lamp together with narrowband ﬁlters. The
emission lines of interest for atmospheric ﬂuorescence produced by the EAS are at 337,
357 and 391nm. The ﬁlters used to evaluate the imaging performance included 340i5nm,
360i5nm, and 390i5nm. A single bandpass ﬁlter between 200-300nm (Sohott UGl) was

"
"4","also used (200-300nm) to determine the performance of the BBM over the full bandwidth.
A digital camera produced by Photometrics SensSys is used to record images produced
by the BBM at the predicted position of the focal plane. Optimization of the J EM-EUSO
instrument has lead to a curved focal plane design. The CCD is mounted on a 2
dimensional stage with travel of 5cm in the X and Z directions. This stage is then
mounted to a 5400m (???) swing arm that matches the radius of curvature of the focal
plane. This setup provides adequate ﬂexibility to investigate the BBM imaging
performance. The central element of the CCD is a Kodak 1401e chip with square pixels
6.8 microns on a side. The full array has 1317x1035 pixels and covers an area 9X7 mm2.
The integration time for each exposure is controlled be a computer and is adjustable from
25 milliseconds to several minutes.

The J EM-EUSO science objectives require an image resolution of less than 5mm
with a design goal for the OM to achieve <3mm. Simulations predicting the performance
of the current OM ﬂight design are shown in Fig 2. Images and results recorded during
testing of the BBM are shown in ﬁgures 3-5. A composite image formed by adding
images formed from the principal atmospheric ﬂuorescence lines represented here by
spike ﬁlters at 340, 360 and 390nm with the collimated xenon source in a sub-aperture
exposure results in an RMS image width of 2.4 mm. The width for just the 360nm image
alone was 2.3mm.

.11., -L- -L. 4.- _..I.._ _..L_ -L-
IF I» Ii- Ir Ir- II- I1
l. l. l. _.‘._ Jl... AL. - J... _
I~ Ir It It Ir I» I-
Fig 2. Simulated performance of the J EM-EUSO OM using the current ﬂight design. The
columns show the predicted image at 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, 20°, 25° and 30° for the 2010
baseline and advanced design. (Maybe we should show the BBM predictions instead?)

Full aperture testing of the BBM used the same sources but without the 60 cm
collimator. For these tests the source was located a distance of 40m from the BBM. This
setup provided a full exposure of the 1.5 m diameter lenses and produced an approximate
parallel beam of light. Images were recorded for on—aXis and tilted at 10°with respect to
the optical aXis. The resulting image size was 2.5 mm RMS for the on-aXis image and 2.7
mm RMS at 10°.

Surface Rougness

The roughness of the ﬁnished lens surface was measured using a replication
process. A commercial replication clay, Reprocil, was applied to several location of the
BBM surface. After drying the molds were lifted off of the lens surface and measured by

"
"5","a Wyko proﬁlometer. A trace from one of the mold impressions of the surface is shown
in Fig6. The surface roughness was studied at several locations and shows a current
performance of ~40 11m RMS.
5 Image Size [Standard Deviation}
3 4.5 I - I I I I
4 I . I I I I
25 I 15 | | | | |
z I E 3 . . . . . .
. , 5.5 I ---......._.I . I I I
15 , E 2
I 1.5
05 6 1 ' ' ' ' ' '
‘5 ”'5 I:I:I:ﬁ
D (I 1 I > 7 2 3 I]
' 3 4 s 5 I 0 1 95m 1411:: zmdimnmm} mm man
Fig 3 Composite Image Fig 4 Image size versus depth for on
axis measurement
25a s__..--I 'I I II: .. _ , - .I —
9m: ' _ ' - . l i __I_. "" "" — -
m I_- ' EWVI'“... j-'- E- _ I .
mu . . _ ! I I . - _ _ _
sun - . I €150 -II 5 _ ' -
Em . . 51m ,..--"" . i.. ' .
E 30"" . . , ! I,- II...
20:: 50 ~I-' I._. ___. a
_ E _'— 5
1M 5 , 4
a I 3"" D II. - ff - '5'”... ' TIE”: .-. .-""--r - - .-""' ,er-Ila E
u 1 I 3 - - . '1‘ f D 1 2 I ""J; ' -- .‘Il:'_.._?’u1 .5""
xi"" I'Hm a 5 E ? I: u 3-."" Iin ""I'm 5 '5 '.-' a i.""
Fig 5. Full aperture images With the source on-aXis (left) and at 10° off-axis (right). A
bandpass ﬁlter transmitting between 300-400 nm was used to restrict the wavelengths
from the xenon source.
200
LIFClcubAii 100
LIFCZCUbAii 2er IS 'rk‘f I‘f‘. (I ‘¢\ ‘QI h, ‘ I“* ‘
_ w «I WWII"" mm
L1FC3cubAii V "" M II» ""
— — 100
— 200
0 200 400 600
ii,ii,ii
Fig 6. Traces of the optical surface of one lens after manufacturing.

"
"6","Summary

These preliminary tests 011 the BBM validate the technology and approach used to
meet the OM requirements for the J EM-EUSO mission. The data shows that the BBM
OM meets the expected performance as manufactured. Furthermore the performance
meets or exceeds the instrument requirements for the scale model. A more thorough and
complete set of tests have been proposed to NASA under the Explorer Program as part of
a Mission of Opportunity. More detailed tests Will likely provide the data necessary to
understand the 2% increase in the focal length measured compared to simulations. The
surface roughness analysis Will help improve the manufacturing process to furthere
reduce the surface roughness to help meet the goal of 20 nm RMS.

"
