"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29
r,“1,.i‘i‘é‘ﬁfj-Lﬁlg‘}:-r; Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ""I / ’
V H3 Acta Astronautlca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/|ocate/actaastro 1“} K V33
—
Resolutlon of psychosoc1al crlses assoc1ated w1th ﬂylng 1n space
Peter Suedfeld, Jelena Brcic*
University of British Columbia, Department of Psychology, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z4
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Erikson (1959) proposed a theoretical basis for healthy psychosocial development. His
RECEiVEd 11 January 2011 theory posits eight critical conﬂict situations throughout one’s lifetime, each of which
RECEiVEd in FEViSEd form can result in a favorable or unfavorable resolution. Autobiographies, memoirs, inter—
“ FEbruary 20“ views, personal diaries, and oral histories of 97 international astronauts were content
Accepted 28 February 2011 . . , . .
Available online 12 M ar ch 2011 analyzed to assess reported resolutlons of Erlkson s psychosoc1al cr1ses, regardless of
— chronological sequence. We made comparisons across ﬂight phases (before, during, and
KeJ/WOTdSI after), gender, nationality of home space agency, and ﬂight duration. Astronauts
Erikson’S psyChOSOCial crises reported more favorable than unfavorable outcomes across ﬂight phases and demo—
ggggiim h 1 graphic variables. Differences across demographic variables and ﬂight phases, as well as
psyc O Ogy the changes as a result of the ﬂight are discussed.
© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction not produced in the context of personality evaluation or
testing.
The current paper focuses on the personal Character—
istics and concerns of astronauts’ psychosocial issues 1.1. Background
before, during, and after their missions, and their post—
mission adaptation to life back on Earth. Problems of The research described in this paper uses as its
access, small sample sizes, time constraints, and the like, theoretical base the formulation of healthy psychosocial
were circumvented by the use of archival materials development proposed by Erikson [1—3]. Erikson’s frame—
produced by the astronauts: memoirs and autobiogra— work addresses “the conﬂicts, inner and outer, which the
phies, usually book length, interviews with mass media, healthy personality weathers, emerging and re—emerging
and oral histories produced by NASA. These narratives with an increased sense of inner unity, with an increase in
come from astronauts of many nations, diverse profes— good judgment, and an increase in the capacity to do well,
sional backgrounds, and both sexes. One possible source according to the standards of those who are signiﬁcant to
of bias in content analysis research is impression manage— him” ([1], p. 51). The theory posits that eight such critical
ment: the desire of the individual to appear positive, conﬂict situations arise during the lifespan. Each of them
strong, altruistic, etc. However, Erikson’s criteria are may or may not be solved successfully. Speciﬁc labels
relatively subtle, and it is not clear how one can make attached to each anchor of the dimensions differ slightly
oneself look good. Additional safeguards against this bias in various versions of the theory, but without signiﬁcant
are the wide variety of written and recorded sources changes in meaning (Table 1).
scored in this study, and the fact that the material was The favorable resolution of each of the conﬂicts leads
to a change in perspective, integrated into the healthy
personality, and enabling the individual to continue a
life—long course of development. An unfavorable resolu—
morning author_ Tel.: +1 604 822 6666 tion, on the other hand, can lead to permanent stunting or
E—mailaddress:jelenabrcic@psych.ubc.ca (J. Brcic). warping Of the personality. Erikson suggests that these
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.02.011

"
"2","P. Suedfeld, ]. Brcic / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29 25
Table 1
Erikson’s “psychosocial crises.”
Crisis Favorable outcome Unfavorable outcome
Trust vs. mistrust Reasonable sense of trust in others; trustworthiness of self; optimism Withdrawal, suspicion, pessimism
Autonomy vs. Sense of self—control and adequacy; exploration; activity Low self—worth; conformity
shame and
doubt
Initiative vs. guilt Purpose and direction; ability to initiate activities; competitiveness Sense of being essentially bad; moralism; jealousy
Industry vs. Sense of mastery; productivity; achievement Sense of inadequacy; inferiority
inferiority
Identity vs. role Integrated image of oneself as a unique person Confusion about own real identity
confusion
Intimacy vs. Capacity for Close relationships; commitments to other people Failure to secure Close and cooperative relationships
isolation
Generativity vs. Concern for establishing and guiding future generations; altruism, Self—indulgence; interpersonal impoverishment
self—absorption creativity
Integrity vs. Sense of acceptance; fulﬁllment; satisfaction with one’s life and with Regret; sense of not fulﬁlling one’s life desires;
despair disgust Close others; ability to face death with dignity misanthropy and contempt for others
crises become important in chronological order from birth applicants with personal problems related to unfavor—
through old age. However, although each item becomes able resolutions would be selected for training as an
important at the proper age and in the proper sequence, astronaut and further for assignment to a mission [5].
they are all related to each other and each exists in some b. Previous research and anecdotal evidence support a
form both before and after it becomes critical. This model general perception of high cohesiveness among most
is an advance over many other developmental stage astronaut teams. Studies of astronauts have reported
theories, due to its comprehensive articulation of many high scores on afﬁliation motivation [6], universalism
issues of adulthood and its systematic description of (a positive reaction to people regardless of nationality,
lifespan personality development. ethnicity, etc.), benevolence (caring about those with
Among the special strengths of Erikson’s formulation whom one is in close personal contact) [7], and leader
are the following: orientations emphasizing group morale and coopera—
tion rather than task criteria [6]. In addition, the size
a. it is truly a lifespan theory, dealing with common and conﬁguration of spacecraft encourage a feeling of
crises of the personality from infancy through “togetherness.” Accordingly, we predicted that there
advanced old age; would be highly skewed results favoring intimacy over
b. it pays equal attention to positive and negative (favor— isolation.
able and unfavorable) resolutions of those crises, c. All existing studies have shown astronauts to be very
rather than — as is the case with many theories — high in achievement motivation, and on achievement
concentrating on dysfunctions; as a basic value, bearing out an impression that their
c. because of the previous point, it is well suited for the biographies strongly communicate [6,7]. Furthermore,
study of highly functioning, psychologically healthy astronauts are selected on the basis of successful
individuals; and endeavors in education and pre—selection occupations.
d. it not only lends itself well to thematic content Therefore, we expected that industry would show a
analysis, but has already been used in that way [4]. signiﬁcant predominance over inferiority.
d. Finally, as a consequence of the experiences and
In the current research, we treated Erikson’s model as surmounted challenges that 16d them to their role,
providing an appropriate framework for examining the we predicted that .astronauts’ strong ego and sense Of
psychosocial orientations of veterans of spaceﬂight. In 56” WOUld, result in a lOpSIdEd favorable outcome Of
doing so, it is not necessary to regard the psychosocial the crises 1dent1ty VS' role confu51on.
conﬂicts as sequential stages in development. Instead, we
used them as categories to assess how astronauts resolved
this set of conﬂicting dualities, and whether these resolu— 2' Methodology
tions were modiﬁed across the three mission phases , , ,
(pre—ﬂight, in—ﬂight, and post—ﬂight). The. primary method of analySIS'was thematic content
analy51s (TCA). TCA involves the objective and systematic
conversion of qualitative materials, such as the texts of
1.2. Hypotheses diaries or interviews, into quantitative data allowing for
the assessment of reliability and for standard statistical
a. We predicted that across all demographic and experi— analysis of the results [8]. A wide variety of materials can
ential categories, astronauts would indicate predomi— be scored, including almost all verbal (oral, written, or
nantly favorable resolutions of all Eriksonian crises. recorded) statements. Data acquisition is not limited by
Looking at the list of crises, it seems unlikely that personal access to the subjects.

"
"3","26 P. Suedfeld, ]. Brcic / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29
Many variables can be scored by TCA (see, e.g. [6,7, category were the European Space Agency, the Canadian
9,10]), and if scoring criteria are not readily available fora Space Agency, and the Japan Aerospace Exploration
variable of interest, the researchers may create and Agency.
validate their own scale. The method has high external Flight duration refers to the time span of astronaut’s
validity. The participants are not inﬂuenced by the ﬂight. Short ﬂights were two weeks or less in length,
research questions, as the material is generated while while long ﬂights were deﬁned as ﬂights of four or more
the subject is engaging in everyday activities. Thus, TCA is months. All but four astronauts who ﬂew on a long ﬂight
an unobtrusive and naturalistic process of data collection were 155 expedition members. The other four subjects
[8,9]. ﬂew on Mir.
However, the method does have drawbacks as well. Sex is the third independent variable.
Some of these are the inability of the researcher to A repeated measures variable, mission phase, was
manipulate the environment, control the independent added as the fourth independent variable. mission phase
variables, ask speciﬁc questions, or draw strong cause— refers to whether a particular portion of the narrative
effect inferences. If the limitations are properly addressed, refers to the time period before, during, or after the ﬂight.
the advantages of TCA outweigh the disadvantages.
In the current study, standard procedures regarding .
. . . . . . 2.2. Scoring
scorer training and 1nter—scorer re11ab111ty were followed
.Allhm rilwr r inhln wrin .
[8] t e ate a S e e 5C0 Ed t g a guage tte Each document was read by a trained scorer, who
or spoken by the astronaut. Any discrepanC1es were . .
. . identiﬁed passages (one or a few sentences) related to any
resolved through discussmn between the scorers. . , . .. ,,
. . of Erikson s crises, and coded the outcome as favorable
A Wide search was made for narratives of astronauts .. ,, .
. . . . or unfavorable (as deﬁned by Erikson). Table 3 presents
that had appeared in print or on11ne. Materials that were .
. . . . some examples of such passages. Passages that included
scored included books, media 1nterv1ews, and NASA oral . . .
. . . . . . . scored materials were copied, and a second blind scorer
history 1nterv1ews. Media 1nterv1ews were retrieved from . o
. . . . . independently coded a randomly selected 10—50/0 of the
on11ne and media archives. NASA oral histories and Inter— .
. . . . . . materlal. The percent agreement between the two scorers
national Space Station pre—ﬂ1ght 1nterv1ews are available 0 .
, . . was 86/0. Only scores on Wthh both scorers agreed were
on NASA 5 web51te. A complete list of the data sources can .
. used in further data analyses.
be obtained from the authors. . . . . . .
Ind1v1dual outcome scores were derived by d1v1d1ng
the number of outcomes in each of the 16 categories
2.1. Independent variables (8 crises x 2 possible outcomes) by the total number of
mentioned outcomes. The scores were then multiplied by
As this is not an experimental study, references to 100 to yield a percentage score. The number of subjects
independent variables mean the categories into which we varied across mission phases because (a) interviews were
divided the astronaut sample, based on demographic and most common prior to launch, and (b) autobiographies
experiential factors. This enables us to analyze the data went into considerable detail about pre—ﬂight (early life,
set with inferential statistics. Three between—group inde— selection, and training) and post—return activities, with
pendent variables were identiﬁed. Table 2 shows the fewer references to the period of the ﬂight itself. Although
distribution of the 97 respondents in this data set, diaries and in—ﬂight notes tended to focus on technical
arranged according to the three categories. issues, but they also contained scoreable material as
Home agency (NASA, RKA, or other) refers to the space deﬁned by Erikson’s criteria.
agency that employs the astronaut. Speciﬁcally, “NASA” The chronological sequence that Erikson proposed for
refers to astronauts who were selected by and initially the peaking of each crisis was impossible to score from
trained by NASA. These astronauts are not necessarily the the material. In any case, there is some question as to
Citizens of the United States. “RKA,” the abbreviation for whether Erikson’s crises actually have to occur sequen—
the Russian Federal Space Agency, refers to cosmonauts tially at fairly speciﬁc life periods, or it is the case that
whose home agency is the Russian space program. once a conﬂict has been successfully resolved it no longer
“Other” refers to the astronauts from the space programs plays a role in the person’s life [11]. Instead of focusing on
of neither of the two major countries involved in space developmental sequence, we were interested in whether
travel. Some of the agencies included in the “other” the eight crises represented experiences that were impor—
tant and relevant enough for the astronauts to discuss in
Table2 the materials and, if so, whether the outcomes of the
Number Of SUbJECtS by category crises were perceived in positive or negative terms.
Category Value N = 97
— 2.3. Data analysis
Home agency USA 54
Russia 30 , ,
Other 13 Data were analyzed Via the General Linear Model
Sex Male 79 (Univariate ANOVA). In case of assumption violations,
. . Female 18 such as the homogeneity of variance, the Welch correc—
thht duratlon E22” :3 tion was applied [12]. Tukey post—hoc contrast analysis
g was used to determine signiﬁcant intergroup differences

"
"4","P. Suedfeld, ]. Brcic / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29 27
Table 3
Examples of Erikson outcome mentions in astronaut narratives.
Crisis Example
Trust I love “Soyuz” and I have complete faith and trust in our Russian
partners... I trust my life to their judgment and to the hard work that
their team puts together to launch and land “Soyuz” spacecraft.
Autonomy I had a lot of challenges along the way, but because I knew how to work hard
and not to give up, I was able to reach my goals and become an astronaut.
Initiative When I had to make the choice of where to go to work . I chose to go to
the cosmonauts training center, Star City. When I had the opportunity to
turn in my application. I did take that chance.
Industry I am the head of Cosmonaut Corps at the cosmonaut training center. I make all the
important decisions and have many responsibilities.
Identity once we got into the orbit, we ceased being American astronauts and
Russian cosmonauts. We thought a lot about that before we ﬂew — when we
were in space, we were really emissaries of something different. We were an
entity that really did not belong to one country, that represented hopefully
the ambitions of the species.
Intimacy I feel very lucky to work with the crew that I have. All the guys that I
have as members of my crew are really special...it will be very interesting.
Generativity We have a space program, that is really fueled by interest and support of
people across the country, so it is important to have kids and adults who
are educated about why we do these things. I think the interest kids have
today is high, but not as high as I remember it during the ""heroic” period
of the early days of space.
Integrity And I am proud and very happy to be part of this movement in this strategic
area of the humankind development, that I can make my contribution in making that happen.
Table 4 40
. . . . . IOther
Resolution of Er1kson1an crises across all ﬂight stages.
— 35 Russia I
Outcome 30 IU.S. A
Crisis Favorable Unfavorable 25
Trust vs. mistrust 9.36 (13.88) 1.55 (4.26) 20 T ‘I'
Autonomy vs. shame and doubt 8.81 (11.59) 1.99 (4.39) 15
Initiative vs. guilt 7.98 (10.97) 0.33 (1.70)
Industry vs. inferiority 20.22 (18.87) 2.06 (4.74) 10
Identity vs. role confusion 11.04 (18.38) 0.13 (0.83)
Intimacy vs. isolation 16.84 (17.67) 0.30 (1.32) 5 T T
Generativity vs. self—absorption 5.71 (9.62) 0.46 (2.29) 0
Integr1ty VS' despair 9'79 (18'10) 0'45 (1'93) Autonomy Identity Industly Initiative Integrity
. Fi . 1. Si niﬁcant home a enc differences.
for the Home Agency var1able. Repeated Measures ANOVA g g g y
was used to analyze differences across ﬂight phases.
processes appear to have produced a group that is posi—
3. Results and discussion tioned well in the major areas that affect adaptation and
performance.
Table 4 shows the overall results. We next turn to subgroup patterns to assess whether
As predicted by Hypothesis a, the most striking result demographic and temporal aspects differed among the
is the overwhelming preponderance of favorable out— astronauts. The following intergroup differences were
comes and the commensurate paucity of unfavorable statistically signiﬁcant.
ones. Also noteworthy is the high score for industry, in
support of Hypothesis b and conﬁrming ﬁndings related 3.1. Home agency
to the astronauts’ achievement orientation [6]. The posi—
tive outcomes for intimacy (Hypothesis c) and trust As Fig. 1 shows, the highest scores on autonomy,
indicate that the respondents enjoy social interaction initiative, and industry were obtained by Russian cosmo—
and are successful interpersonally and socially. Industry nauts, followed by US and other nationalities in that
and initiative reﬂect that they have a similar positive order. This may seem surprising, given the common
outlook concerning their work, and the scores on identity stereotypes of the various cultures. Russian culture is
(Hypothesis cl), generativity, and integrity characterize a often Characterized as valuing collectivism more, and
group that is psychologically healthy and not highly self— individualism less, than is the case in the US and Western
centered. Thus, the space agencies’ selection and training Europe [13]. The emphasis of the Russian cosmonaut

"
"5","28 P. Suedfeld, ]. Brcic / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29
selection and training programs on optimizing team 25
selection and teamwork is a natural reﬂection of these 'ShonF'ight 1’
many general differences, but in a collectivistic culture LongFlight
these variables may not be as Closely related to individual 20
performance as they might be in a more individualistic
culture [14]. Thus, the scores of the cosmonauts on these 15 T
three factors may reﬂect their feelings of pride and T
achievement as members of the program and of their
own speciﬁc crew, whereas the scores of the western 10
astronauts may be based more on their own personal
accomplishments. T
This interpretation is reinforced by the other signiﬁ— 5
cant difference: cosmonauts were by far the lowest on the
dimension of identity, with “other” nationalities by far the 0
highest and US astronauts in the middle. Identity, the Autonomy Initiative Intimacy Identity
opposite of role confusion, is heavily loaded in favor of
individualism, the view of oneself as a unique person as Fig- 2- Signiﬁcant ﬂight duration differenCES-
opposed to the collectivistic view of oneself as part of a
social group identity. One implication of this ﬁnding is complete the work. Many astronauts have stated that a
that Erikson’s deﬁnitions of the outcomes of this crisis Shuttle ﬂight was like a 100—m dash while an ISS mission
may need to be re—evaluated for studies whose subjects was a marathon. Long—duration astronauts needed to
have a collectivist cultural background. assert their choice and will, initiate some of their own
American astronauts mention the dimension of integ— activities, and demand free time if needed. The high
rity more frequently than do Russian cosmonauts, but not scores on autonomy and initiative suggest that the astro—
more than the ‘other’ astronauts. Once again, the resolu— nauts who ﬂew on longer ﬂights were independent
tion of the integrity is in favor of the individualism, with self—starters; their time was also markedly less over—
markers such as “I feel asense of fulﬁllment with my life” programmed by mission control than those of shorter
and “I am happy with my life and feel that I accomplished missions. Simulation studies have shown that long—dura—
what I wanted to”. This ﬁnding supports the Claims made tion participants appear to be in a better mood and are more
above with the other signiﬁcant dimensions. creative under high—autonomy conditions [15], an issue that
is of concern for planners of the future Mars mission.
3.2. Sex High scores on intimacy are not surprising, in the light
of previous ﬁndings regarding long—duration astronauts’
The only signiﬁcant gender difference was in Mistrust, high afﬁliation motivation [6] and mentions of the uni—
where women scored lower than men, M=0.44% vs. versalism value [7]. The astronauts were building and
1.80%, F (1, 90):].49, p=0.03. This difference may be maintaining new relationships in the months spent
due to higher competitiveness among the male astro— together and in some cases referred to their crew as
nauts. Interestingly, when crewmembers who ﬂew on the family.
long ﬂights (ISS and Mir) were omitted from the analysis, The low scores on identity could be the result of the
female non—ISS astronauts scored lower than the males on crew adopting the same international identity. The exam—
intimacy, M:2.23% vs. 15.58%, F (1, 44):]0.84, p 20.00. ple in Table 3 for identity reﬂects that possibility. The
Women in the space program have a ﬁrm sense of who long—duration crews could shed their national identity
they are, and a positive outlook on their own life— not and adopt a more international one for the beneﬁt of
surprisingly, in a group that has had such outstanding the group.
achievement in an essentially male—dominated activity.
They also tend to perceive their interpersonal relation—
ships as relatively distanced and cool; their dedication 3.4. Changes across mission phases
and success to their unusual career path may interfere
with establishing close, warm relationships. Looking at changes in crisis outcome references across
mission phases, we can see changes in generativity and
3.3. Mission duration integrity (Fig. 3).
Generativity refers to altruism and concern for future
Fig. 2 shows all signiﬁcant differences for ﬂight length. generations, and in Erikson’s theory emerges as important
It is important to note once again that all but four of the in late middle age or early old age. Some, but by no means
subjects in the long—duration category are 155 astronauts. all, of the astronauts had entered this stage of life at the
The remaining four ﬂew on Mir; two are Russian and two time the materials were produced, but the challenges and
are American. hazards of spaceﬂight may have drawn their thoughts
The highest scores on autonomy, initiative, and inti— toward this topic earlier than might be the case for the
macy were obtained by long—duration astronauts. These general population. In addition, the change in values that
results could be the function of selection and training, the we found among astronautS—a greater appreciation of
mission itself, the work to be completed, and the time to the unity of humankind, the beauty of the Earth, and the

"
"6","P. Suedfeld, ]. Brcic / Acta Astronautica 69 (2011) 24—29 29
25 References
—Integrity
- - Generativity ” [1] EH. Erikson, Growth and crises of the healthy personality, in:
20 GS. Klein (Ed.), Psychological Issues, International Universities
’ Press, New York1959, pp. 50—100.
I [2] EH. Erikson, Life History and the Historical Moment: Diverse
15 I Presentations, Norton, New York, 1975.
I [3] EH. Erikson, The Life Cycle Completed: A Review, Norton, New
I York, 1982.
10 I [4] P. Suedfeld, E. Soriano, D.L. McMurtry, H. Paterson, T.L. Weiszbeck,
R. I(rell, Erikson’s “Components of a healthy personality” among
I Holocaust survivors immediately and forty years after the war, Int.
J. Aging Hum. Dev. 60 (2005) 229—248.
5 I [5] P. Suedfeld, Applying positive psychology in the study of extreme
/ environments, Hum. Perf. Extrem. Environ. 6 (2001) 15—21.
_ _ , [6] J. Brcic, Motivational proﬁle of astronauts at the international space
0 ‘ - — station, Acta Astronaut. 67 (2010) 1110—1115.
[7] P. Suedfeld, K. Legkaia, J. Brcic, Changes in the hierarchy of value
Pre-Flight In-Flight Post-Flight references associated with ﬂying in space, J. Pers. 78 (2010)
1411—1436.
Fig. 3. Signiﬁcant changes across ﬂight phases [8] T.F. Carney, Content Analysis: A technique for Systematic Inference
from Communication, University of Manitoba Press, Winnipeg,
1972.
need to preserve that beauty [7]—is also I‘EHECtEd in the [9] LA. Gottschalk, Content Analysis of Verbal Behaviour: New
raised generativity score. Findings and Clinical Applications, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 1995.
Another drastic Change iS the large, steady increase [10] C.P..Smith, in: ].W. Atkinson, D.C. McClelland, _[. Veroff (Eds.),
, , , , Motivation and Personality: Handbook of Thematic Content Ana—
across the m15510n 0n 1ntegr1ty. Clearly, the sense of 13,515, Cambridge University press, New York 199;
accomplishment and satisfaction continues to build from [11] A. Stewart, C. Franz, L. Layton, The changing self: Using personal
- - v - documents to study lives, J. Pers. 56 (1988) 41—53.
the bEglnnlng 9f the aStronaUt S career Into the long term' [12] J. Cohen, P. Cohen, G. West, L.S.Aiken,App1ied Multiple Regression/
Counterbalancmg aHECdOtal rePOFtS Of aStronaUts Whose Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, Lawrence Erlbaum
later life is marred by frustration, disappointment, and Associates, New Jersey, 2003.
unhappiness, this iS a more optimistic ﬁnding. [13] ].B. Ritsher, Cultural factors and the International Space Station,
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 76 (2005) 135—144.
[14] H.C. Triandis, Individualism and Collectivism, Westview, San Fran—
4. Conclusion cisco, 1995.
[15] N. Kanas, S. Saylor, M. Harris, T. Neylan, J. Boyd, S.D. Weiss,
, - - P. Baskin, C. Cook, C. Marmar, High versus low crewmember
MOSt nOtably’ the aStronaUts personal CharaCtenStlcs autonomy in space simulation environments, Acta Astronaut. 67
and experiences, and the mission itself, d0 inﬂuence the (2010) 731_73g_
resolution of Eriksonian psychosocial conﬂicts towards [16] L- ASpinwall. R- Tedeschi. The value of positive psychology for
the favorable. The demonstration that Erikson’s resolu— healthPSyChOIOgy‘ progress and pitfalls in examining the rdatio“
, , , , of p051t1ve phenomena to health, Ann. Behav. Med. 39 (2010) 4—15.
thHS can be meanlngfully SCOFEd from archlval materlals [17] M. Eriksson, B. Lindstrém, Antonovsky’s sense of coherence scale
by TCA iS another contribution to the growing literature and its relation with quality of life: a systematic review, J.
demonstrating the importance of positive psychology Epldemml' commun' Health 61 (2007) 938—944 . .
. [18] VS. Helgeson, I(.A. Reynolds, P.L.Tom1ch,A meta—analytic rev1ew of
[5'16], saIUtOgEHESIS [17]? and post—stress grOWth [18] beneﬁt ﬁnding and growth, J. Consult. Clin. Psych. 74 (2006)
for a full understanding of the effects of spaceﬂight. 797—816.

"
