"","x"
"1","I u u I
IOPSCIGnce IDDSCIEI'ICEJﬂpﬂfg
Home Search Collections Journals About Contact us My IOPscience
Versatile compact X-ray radiography module for materials science under microgravity
conditions
This article has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text article.
2011 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 327 012011
(http://iopscience.iop.org/1742-6596/327/1/012011)
View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage for more
Download details:
IP Address: 128.157.160.13
The article was downloaded on 12/12/2011 at 14:54
Please note that terms and conditions apply.

"
"2","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
Versatile compact X-ray radiography module for
materials science under microgravity conditions.
F Kargll, M Balterl, Ch StenzelQ, Th Gruhl3, N Daneke3 and A
Meyer1
1 Institut fiir Materialphysik im Weltraum, Deutsches Zentrum fiir Luft— und Raumfahrt
(DLR), 51170 Koln, Germany
2 Astrium — Space Transportation, Physical Sciences (TO 5), 88039 Friedrichshafen, Germany
3 Viscom AG, Carl—Buderus—Straﬁe 9—15, 30455 Hannover, Germany
E—mail: florian . kargl©dlr . de
Abstract. A versatile compact microfocus X—ray radiography facility is presented. The
facility serves as a technology demonstrator showing the applicability of X—ray radiography
to experiments in space. It has been designed as an insert fully compatible With requirements of
the Materials Science Laboratory aboard the International Space Station. The facility consists
of a microfocus X—ray source delivering up to 20W X—ray power at 100 kV acceleration voltage
and a 49.2><49.3 mm RadEye2 sensor With a Scint—X scintillator at 48 mm per pixel resolution
With a 14bit dynamic range. The total device weight including sample Chamber is 43 kg. The
facility is Classiﬁed as a fully protected radiography equipment according to German radiation
safety laws. The capabilities of the facility for research in materials sciences are demonstrated
in ground—based experiments.
1. Introduction
In recent years in—situ studying of processes became increasingly important for various ﬁelds of
science. In materials sciences the in—situ study of materials and processes enables to discover
not only new phenomena but also to revise previously obtained results sometimes subject to a
larger error. In—situ methods hereby greatly beneﬁt from the improved and novel experimental
equipment developed in recent years.

In materials science and here in particular in the area of research on metal—based materials
the advent of fast high resolution area detectors and highly brilliant synchrotron sources enabled
to study of phenomena in the area of solidiﬁcation on real samples [1, 2, 3] and not only on
the previously used more easily accessible transparent analogue materials [4]. With the advent
of miorofoous X—ray sources in—situ studies are also possible in the laboratory as demonstrated
for studying diffusion [5] and even under microgravity as shown for foaming of metals [6, 7, 8].
The latter studies are part of the X—ray monitoring (XRMON) project set—up as part of the
ESA—MAP programme. The project focuses not only on the investigation of foaming but on a
number of other processes in metallic melts that greatly beneﬁt from in—situ analysis like e. g.
diffusion and solidiﬁcation.

In metal research experiments under microgravity are essential to study processes Without
being inﬂuenced by unwanted effects caused by the presence of the gravitational force as e. g.
buoyanoy—driven convective ﬂow or sedimentation. Hereby, various possibilities exist to achieve
Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd 1

"
"3","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
,3; “w
{n ‘ M .I’ A \ «i “ vm
_ .7 .. 53‘ i % “i \ {x ,, ~ ‘ j%\\
, ~' / ‘é=_I"""" - g ‘1. _A ‘\ . l ,‘3 ‘ ;:., M
.. ‘ . W 1""\ &:q: I S
M ‘ \* Wwﬁ ;
Figure 1. Left: Photograph of assembled fully MSL compatible X—ray radiography insert. The
access port to the X—ray source compartment is opened With the turbornolecular pump Visible
at the top and the X—ray driving electronics at the bottom. Water cooling pipes are shown at
the top cooling the X—ray front end. Cable feed through ports on the sample Chamber are not
mounted With the access holes covered by lead shielded blanks. Right: Photograph of the X—ray
insert installed in the MSL equivalent processing Chamber. Water cooling pipes connected to
the detector are Visible.
microgravity conditions. Amongst those are drop tower, parabolic ﬂight, sounding rocket, and
satellite experiments as well as experiment on the International Space Station (188). The order
of the platforms is according to increasing microgravity time available Which ranges from a few
seconds to days.

Radiation safety requirements initially precluded the use of X—ray radiation in microgravity
research due to bulkiness and weight constraints of the source as well as the heavy metal shielding
required. However, as demonstrated in parabolic ﬂight campaigns [9] but more recently also
aboard sounding rockets (MASER—ll May 2008 [10], MAXUS—8 March 2010, and MASER—12
November 2011) microfocus X—ray sources are sufﬁciently compact to enable operation on these
platforms. Sealed—tube microfocus X—ray sources have been used so far. However, these sealed—
tube sources show a ﬁnite lifetime and a pre—deﬂned target—substrate combination. Therefore,
they might not be an optimal Choice considering research in the MSL aboard the 188, Where
long—time usability and ﬂexibility of such a device is a key factor.

Therefore, the development of a compact but ﬂexible microfocus X—ray facility that meets
requirements of research under microgravity conditions and in particular demands by the MSL
aboard 188 is mandatory to enable increased future use in in—situ studies of materials under
microgravity conditions. Here, such a facility that meets not only scientiﬁc requirements in
terms of source power, resolution, and image depth but also technical and safety requirements for
operation aboard 188 is presented. The facility was developed by Astriuin GmbH together With
Viscorn AG and partnersThe previously mentioned key factors are met by using an actievely
pumped X—ray tube as part of the facility. The here discussed facility has a total weight of only
43 kg and can be safely operated in any laboratory. The facility is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to allow
for operation on diﬂerent other microgravity platforms With minor adaptations.

2. Facility Parameters

Figure 1 left shows a photograph of the X—ray radiography insert. Figure 1 right shows the

insert integrated into the MSL compatible processing Chamber. The insert consists of three
2

"
"4","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
I I
—- l. .:=—.'-17.'-—--_- T'Hi'l' I .

|_l :I|..—-,I _ . “HJ- :'— . -: L

l. -...L. ' ' _ 41“"" ii:

- -. -- «41 '1 =.__

I |! m I-- 1 I ' : I

I |_ _,_, __, 1:__‘rﬂi _ i I
Figure 2. 2D section View of the X—ray radiography insert. Cathode (red), X—ray focusing optics
(blue) and target (green) on the right of the ﬁgure. The X—ray driving electronics is represented
in light blue and the high voltage generator in light green, Whereas the turbomolecular pump is
represented in yellow. The sample compartment is surrounded by lead shielding (thin dark—red
layer). The volume occupied by the sample environment is given by the semitransparent green
area. The detector module is shown to the left With the detector being the dark/light grey
structure Close to the beam entrance Window.
independent entities: the microfocus X—ray source to the right, the sample environment Chamber
in the center, and the detector module to the left. The drawing of a 2D section of the insert is
shown in ﬁgure 5. The 2D representation gives a better View on the inner parts of the insert
not Visible in the photograph.

The X—ray source entity consists of an outer housing acting both as electrical as well as
radiation protection. The housing is vacuum tight, thereby ensuring ambient conditions required
for safe operation of the X—ray tube. Communication, power supply, and safety interlock cabling
as well as a pre—vacuum line are fed trough a vacuum ﬂexible tube Which can be connected Via a
standard KF25 ﬂange to a ﬂange adapter at the inside of the MSL Chamber. Thereby the X—ray
housing is protected from the MSL Chamber atmosphere may it be under vacuum or partially
pressurized. Operation outside the MSL Chamber does not require this connection. The housing
contains the X—ray tube, its high voltage generator, and the X—ray tube driving electronics. An
adapted version of the standard X9100 tube by Viscom is used. The X—ray tube is ﬁxed to the
housing from the detector side. To the back of the tube the high voltage generator is connected.
The only connection required is a communication cable and a power supplying cable delivering
power at a voltage of 40V to the X—ray tube electronics board. The target currently in place
consists of a 5 pm thin tungsten layer on a 200 ,um thin aluminium Window. It can be easily
replaced by other target materials or by a Beryllium substrate depending on required source
Characteristics. The target is located behind a Circular aperture matching the X—ray cone—beam
size to the detector size. Thereby unwanted X—ray radiation disturbing either image quality or
requiring more substantial shielding is avoided. Further shielding is included inside the housing
at the radiation safety relevant positions. Thereby X—ray emission in backward direction through
the housing is suppressed far below required limits. The tube is actively pumped Via a compact
turbomolecular pump in combination With a diaphragm pump. For continuous operation active
cooling is required. This is guaranteed by thermal connection of the critical parts to the front
plate of the X—ray housing Which is actively cooled by Chilled—Water. The X—ray source of the
insert delivers radiation at a maximum acceleration voltage of 100 kV and at a maximum total
tube power of 20W. Continuous operation of the source is possible up to 80 kV at maximum

3

"
"5","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
tube power. At 100 kV and maximum tube power the source can be operated for up to 20min
before it is switched off required for cooling of the X—ray driving electronics. The electron—beam
size ultimately deﬁning the X—ray beam size is continuously adapted according to the X—ray
power supplied by the source. For low power operation (< 4W) the smallest beam—size is below
3 am and therefore the best resolution can be achieved. At increasing power the electron—beam
size is increasing at the expense of resolution. With the current source detector conﬁguration
power values beyond 15 W lead to a marked increase in electron beam size negatively impacting
on image resolution. Increasing 0f the electron beam size With increasing power is required to
not overheat and damage the target. Target deterioration over time can be accounted for by
rotating the target around its surface normal. With the electron beam slightly off—Center with
respect to the target rotation axis fresh parts of the target can be brought into the electron
beam. TWO independent X—ray safety interlock switches are mounted besides the X—ray beam
aperture in the X—ray tube housing front end. The matching interlock parts are installed to the
inside of the sample environment Chamber. Hereby, safe operation of the source is ensured With
the beam path fully enclosed by the sample environment Chamber and the detector module as
shown in ﬁgure 5. Most importantly, the insert is according to German radiation safety laws
Classiﬁed as a fully protected radiography equipment, i. e. the insert can be safely operated in
the lab Without any further radiation shielding. Hereby, the acceleration voltage is limited to
a maximum of 80 kV at maximum tube power. Within the MSL Chamber operation is safely
possible up to the maximum acceleration voltage of 100 kV at maximum tube power of 20W.
Any staff operating the facility is in both operation conditions, in the lab or in the MSL Chamber,
not required to wear any radiation badges.

The detector is housed inside a vacuum tight aluminium Chamber. Vacuum tightness is
achieved by mounting to the sample environment Chamber. The detector Chamber is Clad by
a thin layer of lead (3mm thickness) at the backplate. The shielding absorbs the primary X—
ray radiation transmitted into the Chamber through the rectangular carbon—ﬁbre Window. The
minimal selectable thickness of the carbon—ﬁbre Window is 0.3 mm. The detector consists of two
RadEyeTM 100 image sensors mounted side by side in RadEye2 conﬁguration. T0 the CMOS
sensors a protective ﬁbre optics faee—plate (FOFP) is mounted. The FOFP serves as radiation
protection for the sensor. Onto the FOFP a Seint—X scintillator is glued. The detector provides
an active detection area of 49.2 X 49.3 mm at 48 am pixel size resulting in a total of 1024x1024
pixels. The detector is actively cooled by a Peltier element. Active cooling to a temperature
of 1600 signiﬁcantly reduces the detector noise. The hot—end 0f the Peltier element is actively
cooled by connecting the detector chamber to the Chilled—Water Circulation. The detector housing
has two vacuum tight feed—throughs. One feed through is responsible for supplying the power
for the Peltier elements and the detector. The other feed through is required for communication
With the detector. Detector communication occurs Via a USB 2.0 read—out interface connected
to the detector and housed inside the same aluminium Chamber. A continuous frame rate of 2
frames per second With a depth of 14bit is achieved With this connection. The detector housing
is mounted to the sample environment Chamber baCk—end With six nuts that can only be opened
With a special tool. The detector housing Whilst mounted to the sample environment Chamber
is vacuum tightly sealed by means of an O—ring.

Currently two sample environment Chambers are available. Both Chambers are made of
stainless—steel and are shielded by a layer of lead of 3mm thickness. Both Chambers have a
Wide opening of diameter 190mm at the front—end enabling easy integration of the sample
environment. The Chamber baCk—ends are sealed by a carbon—ﬁbre Window of 1 mm thickness.
Currently available source to detector distances are 150 mm. This means that With 1 cm distance
between sample and source a maximal magniﬁcation of 15 and therefore the resolution limit given
by the minimal X—ray spot—size can be achieved. Correct positioning of the sample environment
chambers to the X—ray tube housing is facilitated by two ground locating pins and bushings

4

"
"6","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
1.0

— ScintX
0.8 : king 2%?) Figure 3. Modulation transfer function for
— Lanex Fast F the RadEye2 sensor equipped with the Seint—X
ii 0'6 _ Lanex F351 B scintillator as well as with standard seintillators
E 0.4 (Lanex and Min—R) delivered by RadEye. The
latter data were obtained by digitizing a ﬁgure

0.2 supplied with the RadEye2 information sheet.

The data shows that the Seint—X scintillator
00 25 _——_’ 7_—__T 10 outperforms the standard seintillators.
Ip mm""1
made of quenched steel. The MSL sample environment Chamber enables the installation of
two lead—Clad labyrinth like cable duets at the baCk—end 0f the Chamber. These cable—duets
are required to supply the respective sample environment installed inside of the Chamber. The
on—beneh Chamber is equipped with ﬁve welded ports equipped with KF ﬂange connectors.

The total combined weight of the MSL—Compatible version of the insert consisting of tube
housing, MSL—Compatible sample environment Chamber, and the detector module amounts to
only 43 kg.

The X—ray source is operated by the VXC software of Viseom. The software enables setting
of acceleration voltage and beam current within the source operation limits. X—ray tube
conditioning, ﬁlament warm—up, and bearn—Centering procedures can be carried out. For image
recording the software XMC is used. This software allows in—situ correction of the recorded
images for background and differences in pixel detection sensitivity. Recording time per image,
averaging of images, and a number of other standard options for image manipulation and
recording can be set.

3. Evaluation Experiments

Different test procedures were conducted to evaluate the performance of the equipment.

3.]. Modulation Transfer Function

The modulation transfer function shown in ﬁgure 3 0f the detector with the Seint—X scintillator
was evaluated by Viseom. Evaluation was carried out by using a tungsten edge. Hereby the
testpattern was directly mounted to the detector conducting the test in magniﬁcation M : 1
conﬁguration. Hence, the per pixel resolution of the detector rated to be about 10 linepairs
per mm is probed. The X—ray source setting was Chosen such that the X—ray beam size at the
origin is less than the detector pixel size. The MTF for the present scintillator can be compared
with the standard scintillator MTFs usually delivered with the RadEye2 sensor (Cf. ﬁgure 3).
It Clearly shows that the present scintillator outperforms the standard seintillators.

To achieve such high resolution with high contrast is only possible due to the scintillator
used. The scintillator consists of a honeycomb patterned silicon substrate ﬁlled with the
scintillator material. Only light in forward direction within a relatively tight angle of acceptance
is transmitted through the honeycomb pattern. Pixel—Cross talk is thereby avoided to a large
extent. The downside is the approximately 50% reduction in transmission. However, due to
the short detector—souree distance of 150mm only, this is a minor problem compared with the
major gain in image sharpness. Further improvement of the scintillator technology is expected
over the years to come increasing transmission efﬁciency.

5

"
"7","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
3.2. Sample Measurements

An interdiffusion experiment was carried out on a AlCulOat% vs. A1Cu15at% diffusion couple at
a processing temperature of 700 0C using the standard long—Capillary diffusion X—ray radiography
setup described elsewhere [5, 11]. The diffusion couple was mounted inside the graphite furnace.
For this test detector and source were operated in separated conﬁguration inside a lead box in
order to be able to use the standard capillary setup. Hence, the source detector distance was
increased from the nominal 150 mm in ﬂight conﬁguration to 390 mm for the test. The capillary
was mounted such that a magniﬁcation factor of N 1.9 was achieved. Effective pixel resolution
amounts therefore to ~26 am.

For the experiment the sample was pre—heated to 5100C in several steps. The sample was
kept at pre—heat temperature for about 5min. It was then heated to a temperature of7OOOC
with about 7Ks‘1 at which the diffusion experiment was conducted. This temperature was
stabilized. The sample was kept at this temperature for ~10 min followed by cooling to ambient
temperature by switching of the heating power.

Recordings were taken from the start of heating to the diffusion temperature until the sample
had fully solidiﬁed upon cooling. Images were taken with a frame rate of 1 HZ. The X—ray source
was set to 80 kV and 170 MA beam current.

§ 17.5 t1< t2 WWWWWWTWTWW‘W

V I-

: 15-0 1 “mm” ‘ ""1 M“ ' W

o 0.0 I Wm r' _

C33 A|Cu1o VS A|Cu15 -, —

0 5 1O 15
Position (mm)

Figure 4. Left: Cu concentration as a function of position in the diffusion couple at different
times: 751 solid and t2 later stages of diffusion. Right: Recorded images of the diffusion capillary
for the same times (top t1 and bottom t2) and during melting (middle).

Images of the still solid diffusion couple, the diffusion couple during early stages, and during
later stages of the diffusion anneal are shown in ﬁgure 4 on the right. The images were
subjected to standard correction procedures consisting of background subtraction and pixel
gain correction. From the recorded images grey value proﬁles were derived by integrating
radially over the diffusion pair. The axial grey value distribution can be transformed to Cu
concentration following procedures outlined in Ref. [5]. The concentration proﬁles corresponding
to the recorded images for the solid sample and during diffusion annealing are shown in ﬁgure
4 left. Comparing the diffusion proﬁles with proﬁles obtained using a RadEye detector with
standard scintillator and without cooling it turns out that though the X—ray intensity being
detected is lower contrast resolution is increased by 50% and contrast to noise ratio is about
similar.

Besides the described interdiffusion experiment monitored in real time images of two different
solid samples have been recorded. A solidiﬁed Al—Cu alloy subjected to equiaxed growth was
provided by N. Mangelian—Noel and A. Bogno of the IMZNP—CNRS in Marseille. The specimen
was 30X5XO.1 mm in dimension. Recordings with various source settings showed that images can
be recorded in real time with 2 HZ repetition rate providing at the same time better resolution
than recordings taken with a standard detector. In this sample the dendritio growth pattern
was Clearly Visible. For the high magniﬁcation low tube power setup it might even be possible to
follow Cu concentration from the dendrite into the surrounding liquid with an effective per pixel

6

"
"8","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
a . i , a ~ 1 1 3 ~59
2;. ,, “13$“ g, .0, “~* «2 {‘3 i
: "" ﬂ "" """" """" r 1‘ ’3' r ' t
'_ a??? a I i "" *
' 17% I I i . “vi“ ’ « ¢ 2. i h “ l
. ,3: a _ “gas ”a , mpg"": .J‘
. 4. i '1. ""‘ Q as ’ 0
'9 -' a if; . .
~ 0.4 :3“! ‘ .. ~
Figure 5. X—ray radiograrns taken with a X—ray source setting of 60 kV and 170 MA at a
recording time of 2s for a) the solidiﬁed Al—Cu equiaxed growth sample and b) the solidiﬁed
Al—Cu foam sample. A magniﬁcation of approximately 10 was used for recording of a) and
approximately 2 for b), resulting in an effective pixel size of approximately 5 ,um and 25 pm,
respectively.
resolution of N 4 am. Further, images were taken for a solidiﬁed Al—Cu foam sample provided by
F. Garcia—Moreno from Helmholtz Center Berlin, Germany. Again it can be shown that similar
image quality at a slightly better resolution than with a conventional detector can be achieved
at 2HZ image repetition rate. Edges of bubbles in the foam sample are Clearly Visible. The
entire sample of dimensions of 20X20X1 rnrn can be recorded at a magniﬁcation factor of about
25 resulting in an effective pixel size of between 20 ,um and 24 am.

In future, for both, the solidiﬁed AlCu dendrite and the solidiﬁed foam sample, intensity
and therefore the contrast could be increased by using a different target, as e. g. molybdenum
on aluminium thereby increasing the X—ray intensity at lower X—ray energies. Direct—converting
detectors might also be an option provided they reach image stability and quality currently
achieved with scintillator—based detectors and a roughly comparable total detector area. In
this case the signal would be increased by at least a factor ﬁve enabling either low—power high—
resolution operation of the X—ray source at better image quality or faster imaging rates.

4. Conclusion

In conclusion a novel microfocus X—ray demonstrator insert for the Materials Science Laboratory
aboard the International Space Station has been presented. Characteristic features of this facility
were presented in detail and results of ﬁrst tests of operation conditions and imaging capabilities
of this device were discussed. The X—ray source can be operated at acceleration voltages up to
100 kV at a maximal power of up to 20W. Images of 1024>< 1024 pixel at a pixel resolution of
48 ,um and with a depth of 14bit per pixel can be taken at up to two frames per second. The
detector provides a ﬁeld of View of 49.2><49.3 mm. The detector uses a RadEye2 image sensor in
combination with a Scint—X scintillator. The CMOS sensor is shielded by a ﬁbre optics face plate
enabling irradiation with higher energy X—rays. Image resolution is increased compared with
the available standard scintillators. First radiography results of an interdiffusion experiment on
an Al—Cu alloy have been presented. The detector showed an increased contrast resolution at a
decreased contrast to noise ratio. It has been demonstrated that this novel equipment is able to
provide similar results as previously obtained in laboratory experiments using a less integrated
piece of equipment. Improvements in detector technology over the coming years are expected to

7

"
"9","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012011 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012011
enable faster recordings With higher intensity as currently encountered. The insert is currently
slightly modiﬁed to enable its use aboard the DLR sounding rocket MAPHEUS in 2012 together
With the recently designed and tested compact shear—Cell furnace [12] for studying diffusion in
metallic melts.
Acknowledgments
We thank the German Ministry for Economy and Technology (BMWi) for funding of this project
through the Economic Stimulus Package 1. We thank Nathalie Mangelinek—Noel and Abdul Aziz
Bogno 0f the IM2NP—CNRS in Marseille for providing us with a solidiﬁed AlCu sample as well
as Francisco Gareia—Moreno 0f the Helmholtz Center in Berlin for providing us with a Al—Cu
metal foam sample. We thank Henning Weis for critically reading our manuscript.
References
[1] Mathiesen R H, Arnberg L, M0 F, Weitkamp T and Snigirev A 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 5062
[2] Thi H N, Jamgotchinan H, Gastaldi J, Hartwig J, Schenk T, Klein H Billia B, Baruchel J and Dabo Y 2003
J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 36 A83.
[3] Yasuda H, Ohnaka 1, Kawasaki K, Suglyama A, Ohmichi T, Iwane J and Umetani K 2004 J. Cryst. Growth
262 645
[4] Noel N, Jamgotchinan H and Billia B 1997 J. Cryst. Growth 181 117
[5] Zhang B, Griesche A and Meyer A 2010 Phys. Rev. Let. 104 035902
[6] Moreno F G, Fromme M and Banhart J 2004 Adv. Eng. Materials 6 416
[7] Garcia—Moreno F, Holm P and Banhart J 2007 ESA Spec. Publ. 647 389
[8] Holm P, Houltz Y, Lofgren O, Andersson P and Garcia—Moreno F 2007 ESA Spec. Publ. 647 385
[9] Garcia—Moreno F, Jimenez C, Mukherjee M, Holm P, Weise J and Banhart J 2009 Coll. Surf. A: Physchem.
Eng. Aspects 344 101
[10] Garcia—Moreno F, Jimenez C, Mukherjee M and Banhart F 2009 ESA Spec. Publ. 671
[11] Griesche A, Zhang B, Solérzano E and Garcia—Moreno F 2010 Rev. Sci. Instrum.. 81 056104
[12] Neumann Ch, Sondermann E, Kargl F and Meyer A 2011 J. Phys.: Canf. Series (submitted)
8

"
