"","x"
"1","Adv. Space Res. Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 933-940, 2001
@ Pergamon © 2001 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. Allrights reserved
Pnnted 1n Great Britain
www.elsevier.com/locate/asr PII: $02734 177(01)00157-0 0273'1177/01 $2000 + 0-00
AUTOMORPHOGENESIS AND GRAVITROPISM OF
PLANT SEEDLINGS GROWN UNDER
MICROGRAVITY CONDITIONS
T. Hoson‘, M. Saikil, S. Kamisakal, and M. Yamashita2
lDepartment ofBiology, Osaka City University, Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka 558-8585, Japan
2Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Yoshinodai, Sagamihara 229-8510, Japan
ABSTRACT

Plant seedlings exhibit automorphogenesis on clinostats. The occurrence of automorphogenesis was
confirmed under microgravity in Space Shuttle STS-95 ﬂight. Rice coleoptiles showed an inclination toward
the caryopsis in the basal region and a spontaneous curvature in the same adaxial direction in the elongating
region both on a three-dimensional (3-D) clinostat and in space. Both rice roots and ArabidOpsis hypocotyls
also showed a similar morphology in Space and on the 3-D clinostat. In rice coleoptiles, the mechanisms
inducing such an automorphic curvature were studied. The faster-expanding convex side of rice coleoptiles
showed a higher extensibility of the cell wall than the Opposite side. Also, in the convex side, the cell wall
thickness was smaller, the turnover of the matrix polysaccharides was more active, and the microtubules
oriented more transversely than the concave side, and these differences appear to be causes of the curvature.
When rice cole0pti1es grown on the 3-D clinostat were placed horizontally, the gravitropic curvature was
delayed as compared with control coleOptiles. In clinostatted coleOptiles, the corresponding suppression of
the amyIOpIast development was also observed. Similar results were obtained in ArabidOpsis hypocotyls.
Thus, the induction of automorphogenesis and a concomitant decrease in graviresponsiveness occurred in

plant shoots grown under microgravity conditions.
© 2001 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

INTRODUCTION

In a stimulus-free environment, plant seedlings show spontaneous morphogenesis, termed auto-
morphogenesis (Pfeffer, 1904). Changes in morphology of various plant seedlings have been studied on
clinostats with a horizontal rotation axis. In order to simulate microgravity conditions more precisely, we
developed a three-dimensional (3-D) clinostat equipped with two rotation axes placed at right angles (Hoson
et al., 1992, 1997). Both shoots and roots exhibit a characteristic morphogenesis on the 3-D clinostat, although
there are various differences in the fine pattern of morphogenesis by organ type and species. Such
automorphogenesis appears to be an inherent and important process of the early growth phase of plants.
Nevertheless, only a few space experiments focusing on this phenomenon have been carried out. In order to
confirm the occurrence of automorphogenesis in microgravity in space, we cultivated rice and ArabidOpsis
seedlings in the RICE experiment on board during Space Shuttle STS-95 ﬂight and examined the changes in
their morphology (Hoson et a1., 1999). The morphogenesis of plant seedlings on the clinostat and in
microgravity is compared and discussed in the present article.

Another interesting but unsolved problem is whether gravity is required for the deve10pment of
graviperception mechanisms. In some space experiments, using an in-ﬂight centrifuge, gravisensitivity of
space-grown seedlings was evaluated and compared with that of controls. However, information so far
obtained is not enough to draw conclusions. We have approached this problem using the 3-D clinostat. The
results obtained are also discussed in reference to those observed in space.

933

"
"2","934 T. Hoson et al.
AUTOMORPHOGENESIS
0n the 3—D Clinostat

Various plant materials have been grown on the 3—D clinostat and changes in their morphology analyzed
(Hoson et al., 1992, 1995a, 1996, 1997, 1998; Hoson, 1994). The morphology of shoots on the clinostat can
be separated into two major patterns (Table 1). One group shows a spontaneous (automorphic) curvature in
their growing regions in the direction explained by the presence of dorsiventrality. Coleoptiles and epicotyls
of various plants belong to this group. For the direction, rice cole0pti1es show a curvature toward the caryopsis
(adaxial direction), whereas other materials bend away from the seed or caryopsis (abaxial direction). It
appears that the polarity of endogenous gradient in growth capacity in dorsiventral direction is opposite
between rice coleoptiles and other organs tested.

The other group of plant shoots exhibits straight growth without any spontaneous curvature. Hypocotyls
of various plants show this type of growth (Table 1). The difference in morphogenetic pattern between these
two groups appears to be due to the difference in the type of organs. Because a hypocotyl is an organ located
between the seed and the root, it may be difficult for the organ to induce spontaneous curvature. Also, a
hypocotyl is directly connected with a root and, as to the transport of hormones and the translocation of
organic compounds stored in a seed, the organ has characteristics common to roots. Therefore, the orientation
of growth of hypocotyls on the clinostat appears to be inﬂuenced by the direction of root. In fact,Arabidopsis
hypocotyls grow in random directions as roots, even if growth directions of both organs are not always the
same. On the other hand, cress hypocotyls elongate along the direction of the tip of root primordia. Thus,
automorphogenesis of plant shoots on the 3-D clinostat consists of two components; one is the spontaneous
curvature and the other is the changes in growth direction.

Growth pattern of roots on the 3-D clinostat was also separated into two groups (Table 1). One group,
including maize and pea roots, grows in a random fashion. On the other hand, other roots such as rice and
cress elongate along the direction of the tip of root primordia in caryopsis or seed. Both patterns can be
understood universally as the transition of the growth phase from the direction of the tip of root primordia to
random directions. In the former group such a transition occurs in the early growth phase, whereas in the
second group in the late growth phase.

In Space
In some space experiments, changes in the morphology of plant seedlings have been analyzed (Table 2).
Table 1. Automorphogenesis of Plant Seedlings 0n the 3-D Clinostat
Pattern and direction of growth Material Reference
Shoot
Spontaneous curvature
Adaxial direction Rice coleoptile* Hoson et a1. (1992)
Abaxial direction Maize cole0ptile Hoson et a1. (1992)
Pea epicoty1* * Hoson et al. (1992)
Azuki bean epicotyl
Straight growth
Random direction Arabidopsis hypocotyl* Hoson et al. (1999)
Direction of tip of root primordia Cress hypocotyl Hoson et al. (1992)
Cucumber hypocoty1* * * Takahashi et a1. (1999)
Root
Transition from direction of tip of
primordia to random directions
In the early phase Maize, Pea, Azuki bean Hoson et a1. (1992)
In the late phase Rice*, Cress Hoson et a1. (1992)
*, * *, * **, confirmed in RICE (Hoson et al. 1999), AUXIN (Ueda et al. 1999), and PEGT (T akahashi et al.1999)
experiments during STS-95 ﬂight, respectively.

"
"3","' Automorphogenesis and Gravitropism 935
disturbed and randomized in roots elongated into the air.

Arabidopsis seedlings were also grown on orbit in the RICE experiment during STS-95 ﬂight. Control
hypocotyls elongated upward in a stationary orientation on the ground. In space Arabidopsis hypocotyls
elongated in various directions, about 10% of which even grew into the agar medium. However, no clear
curvatures were observed. On the 3-D Clinostat, Arabidopsis hypocotyls showed a similar distribution of
orientations, although the angle was slightly dispersed. Thus, it was confirmed by the RICE experiment that
rice and Arabidopsis seedlings exhibited automorphogenesis under true microgravity conditions as well as
on the Clinostat (Table 1).

In other experiments during STS-95 ﬂight, automorphogenesis of other plant species was also confirmed.
Pea epicotyls on orbit showed a spontaneous curvature away from the seed (U cda et a1., 1999) as on the 3-D
Clinostat (Hoson et a1., 1992). The clear curvature was not observed in maize coleoptiles grown in the same
AUXIN experiment. The result appears to be caused by the aging of materials and the use of light for
observation, because both suppressed automorphic curvatures in various plant materials (unpublished results).
In PEGT experiment, Takahashi et a1. (1999) observed a straight growth of cucumber hypocotyls with forming
two pegs, as on the 3—D Clinostat. Thus, the results obtained in STS-95 experiments as well as those reported
in the past space experiments support the ubiquitous occurrence of automorphogenesis under microgravity
conditions. The results also confirm the effectiveness of the 3-D Clinostat in the analysis of morphogenetic
processes in microgravity.

Mechanism of Automorphic Curvature

The mechanisms by which automorphic curvatures are induced under microgravity conditions have been
studied with maize seedlings grown on the 3-D Clinostat. It was shown that the direct cause of differential
growth in clinostatted coleoptiles (Hoson et a1., 1995a) and roots (Hoson, 1994) was not the difference in the
osmotic potential of the cell sap but that in the cell wall extensibility between the convex and the concave
sides. Some differences in chemical nature of the cell wall constituents between both sides have been detected
in maize coleoptiles grown on the 3-D Clinostat (Hoson et a1., 1995b). Also, the results suggest that the
interaction of the amyloplasts with the microfilaments, which plays an important role in graviperception
(Sievers et a1., 1991), is not involved in the automorphic curvature of maize coleoptiles (Hoson et a1., 1998).

The mechanism of differential growth during automorphic curvatures was also examined with rice
coleoptiles grown in space as well as on the 3—D Clinostat. The segments cut from the curvature portions of
rice coleoptiles were separated into the ventral and the dorsal halves, and then the mechanical properties of
their cell walls were measured with a tensile tester. The dorsal, convex sides of rice grown in space showed
a higher mechanical extensibility of the cell wall than the opposite sides. Such a difference in the cell wall
extensibility was not due to the reversible extensibility but due to the irreversible one. There was a high
correlation between such a difference in the cell wall extensibility and the angle of curvatures of rice
coleOptiles (unpublished results).

The chemical basis for the difference in the cell Wall extensibility was also examined. There is a clear
structural anisotropy between the dorsal and the ventral sides of coleOptiles. Namely, the dorsal side of rice
coleOptiles consists of small, extensible cells and it appears that there is an inherent difference in growth
capacity between both sides. One clear result obtained was that the levels of the wall polysaccharides per unit
length were lower in the convex sides than the opposite sides. The results also showed that the decrease in
the molecular masses of the hemicellulose polysaccharides and the activation of (1—>3),(1—>4)-[5-glucanases
were brought about in the convex sides. Furthermore, the microtubules of epidermal and outer
parenchymatous cells in the convex sides oriented more transversely than the concave sides. Such changes
preceded the automorphic curvatures, when rice seedlings were transferred from a stationary orientation to
the 3-D Clinostat. These results suggest that the uneven modifications of the wall polysaccharide metabolism
and microtubule orientation cause the automorphic curvatures in rice coleoptiles under microgravity
conditions.

GRAVITROPISM
Seedlings Grown on the 3-D Clinostat

Graviresponsiveness of plant seedlings grown on the 3—D Clinostat has been compared with that of control

organs, for clarifying whether or not gravity is required for development of graviperception mechanisms and

"
"4","936 T. Hoson et al.

In the D1 Spacelab experiment, Volkmann et al. (1986) observed that roots of garden cress grew in a direction
forming a constant angle with the seed axis on orbit, although this angle appeared to be overlaid with some
sort of circumnutations. In another experiment using garden cress, random root movement was reported
(J ohnsson et al., 1996). The difference in results may be derived from the age of roots, because the growth
pattern of roots is quite different before and after the transition of growth phase, as mentioned above. Lentil
roots grown in space showed a constant angle with respect to the base line, which is different from the initial
orientation of root primordia (Lorenzi and Perbal, 1990). The pattern of lentil root growth seems to be
common to that of cress roots observed in the D1 mission.

The number of space experiments dealing with the morphogenesis of shoot organs is limited. The
occurrence of automorphogenesis was observed in only one experiment carried out by Heathcote et al. (1994)
using wheat coleOptiles. On orbit wheat coleoptiles bent away from the caryopsis and the bending angle
decreased with coleOptile aging. The authors described such a morphogenesis as a nastic curvature (Heathcote
et al., 1994). The morphology of shoots was examined also in other Space experiments. However, seedlings
did not show the typical automorphogenesis. For instance, maize shoots exhibited disorientated growth, often
with a kink or with root and shoot growing parallel to each other (Schulze et al., 1992). Also, Kiss et a1.
(1998, 1999) observed the development of an anomalous hook in space-grown ArabidOpsis hypocotyls and
concluded that such a morphology was induced by ethylene contamination. .

As described above, the morphogenesis of plant seedlings has been analyzed in only a few space
experiments. Therefore, in the RICE experiment during Space Shuttle STS—95 ﬂight, we determined whether
automorphogenesis took place in microgravity. In a stationary orientation on the ground, coleoptiles of rice
grew upward and their roots downward along gravity vector, although some deviations from the vertical exist.
The morphology of rice seedlings changed greatly in space. Coleoptiles were not straight but bent toward the
caryopsis (adaxially). This bending appeared to consist of the inclination in the basal region and curvature
in the elongating region. The bending in these two regions was estimated separately by measuring the angle
between the base line perpendicular to the long axis of caryOpses and the'basal and tip regions. The obtained
angles were similar between rice coleoptiles grown on the 3-D clinostat and in Space (Hoson et al., 1999). The
angles of spontaneous inclinations and curvatures under microgravity conditions were smaller in a gibberellin-
deficient dwarf cultivar Tan-ginbozu than in a tall cultivar Koshihikari, suggesting that gibberellin is involved
in induction of automorphic curvatures.

In space, rice roots elongated in various directions, more than 20% of which emerged into the air.
However, the direction was not completely random and two thirds of the roots formed a constant mean angle
of about 55° with the perpendicular base line (Hoson et al., 1999). Similar results were obtained for those
grown on the 3-D clinostat, although the major angle was slightly smaller than that in space. On the 3-D
clinostat the direction of root growth changed from the direction of the tip of root primordia to random
directions as described above. Both patterns were observed in rice roots grown on orbit in STS—95 ﬂight. Rice
roots are among the group of plants that elongate in the direction of the tip of primordia for relatively long
period and thus, this result was expected. Because the agar medium was used in the present study, the initial
growth orientation should be maintained in roots that once elongated into the medium but it should be

Table 2. Morphogenesis of Plant Seedlings Observed in the Past Space Experiments
Morphology or growth response* Material Reference
Shoot
Nastic curvature (Abaxial) Wheat coleoptile Heathcote et al. (1994)
Disorientated growth Maize shoot Schulze et al. (1992)
Anomalous hook formation Arabidopsis hypocotyl Kiss et a1. (1998)

Root
Predetermined direction Cress Volkmann et al. (1986)

Lentil Iorenzi and Perbal (1990)

Random directions Cress J ohnsson et a1. (1996)

*, based on the description in references. .

"
"5","Automorphogenesis and Gravitropism 937
Table 3. Graviresponsiveness of Plant Seedlings Grown on the 3-D Clinostat
Material Responsiveness Reference
Shoot
Rice ooleoptile Clinostat < Control This study
Maize coleOptile Clinostat < Control Hoson et a1. (1998)
ArabidOpsis hypocotyl Clinostat < Control This study
Root
Cress Clinostat = Control Hoson et al. (1996)
Maize Clinostat = Control Hoson et a1. (1998)
White clover Clinostat < Control Smith et al. (1999)
for examining the mechanism of gravitmpism (Table 3). When Clinostatted cress roots were placed
horizontally, the graviresponse was the same as control roots (Hoson et al., 1996). Cress roots grown on the
3-D Clinostat developed statocytes with the characteristic cellular polarity as the controls except a random
distribution of statoliths (Buchen et al., 1993). Similar results were obtained for maize roots (Hoson et al.,
1998). Thus, plant roots grown on the 3-D Clinostat appear to be able to develop the graviperception
mechanism and respond to the gravity vector normally. A decrease in starch in the amy10p1asts was observed
in cress roots grown on the 3-D Clinostat (Buchen et al., 1993). The level of starch may be still enough for the
full sensing even in the clinostatted roots, as suggested inArabidopsis roots using intermediate—starch mutants
(Kiss et al., 1996). On the other hand, roots of white clover grown on a two-axis Clinostat shoWed a reduced
gravicurvature (Smith et al., 1999).

The gravitropic curvature of maize coleOptiles grown on the 3—D Clinostat was suppressed (Hoson et al.,
1998). The graviresponsiveness of clinostatted shoots was further analyzed using plant materials common to
STS-95 experiment, rice coleOptiles andArabidopsis hypocotyls. The gravitropic curvature of rice coleoptiles
grown on the 3-D Clinostat was delayed as compared with that grown in a stationary orientation; 2 h after
gravistimulation the angle of curvature of clinostatted coleoptiles was only 40% of control (Figure 1). Similar

Rice coleoptile Arabidopsis hypocotyl
1 00 50
. —O— Control 7
+ Clinostatted 0
80 ' 40 ' 4
To“
a .-
g 60 30 .
93
*3 40 20
E ‘
8
20 10 ' .
o
0 0 ""
0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5
Time (h)
Fig. 1. Effect of 3-D Clinostat rotation on graviresponse of rice coleOptiles and Arabidopsis hypocotyls.
Seedlings of rice and Arabidopsis, that had been grown in a stationary orientation (0) or on the 3-D Clinostat
(O) at 25°C for 3 days, were placed horizontally and the angle of gravitmpic curvature was measured. Values
are means 1 SE (n = 40).

"
"6","938 T. Hoson et al.
A is see
Miﬁm sﬁgﬁ.
ir§ew N“
V :‘rw‘e‘t st§$§§§
Kites s
.. ﬁmsweﬁt
*x‘L‘W -' -. "":“thKRwﬁ‘ \‘M
Wt
Fig. 2. Effect of 3-D clinostat rotation on deve10pment of the amyloplasts of rice cole0pti1es. Subapical
regions of coleoptiles, that had been grown in a stationary orientation or on the 3-D clinostat at 25°C for 3
days, were transversely cut into thin sections, and then stained with the iodine solution. A, control; B,
clinostatted.
results were obtained for Arabidopsis hypocotyls, although both the final angle of the gravitr0pic curvature
and the degree of delay of curvature were smaller in this material than other stem organs (Figure 1). The
microscopic observation of the longitudinal and cross sections in the elongating region of rice coleoptiles
showed the presence of large sedimentable amyloplasts in the inner parenchyma and a decrease in their
number and size by the clinostat rotation (Figure 2). Also, a decrease in starch in the amy10plasts present in
the starch sheath cells was observed in Arabidopsis hypocotyls grown on the 3-D clinostat. It was also
reported that the clinostat rotation suppressed the gravitropic curvature of the protonema of the moss
Physcomitrella (Knight and Cove, 1991). These results suggest that gravity plays an important role in the
development of graviperception mechanisms in shoot organs.
Seedlings Grown in Space
In some space experiments, graviresponsiveness of roots from space-grown seedlings has been compared
with that of controls (Table 4). Roots of white clover grown in space reSponded the gravistimulation as did
ground controls (Smith et a1., 1999). On the other hand, in bothlenti1(Perbal and Driss-Eoole, 1994; Legué
et al., 1996) and cress (Volkmann and Tewinkel, 1996), space-grown roots showed a rapid gravicurvature and
a larger final angle as compared with ground and space controls. The estimated minimum doses were 20- 30
gs for roots grown under microgravity in space and 50—60 gs for roots grown on a 1 g centrifuge, indicating
Table 4. Graviresponsiveness of Plant Seedlings Grown in Space
Material Responsiveness Reference
Shoot
Oat coleoptile Space (1 g) = Ground Brown et al. (1995)
Arabidopsis hypocotyl Space < Ground* Kiss et a1. (1998)
Root
lentil Space > Ground Perbal and Driss-Ecole (1994)
Space > Space (1 g) Legué et a1. (1996)
Cress Space > Space (1 g) Volkmann and Tewinkel (1996)
White clover Space = Ground Smith et a1. (1999)
*, indirect evidence.

"
"7","Automorphogenesis and Gravitropism 939
that microgravity roots have a higher sensitivity than control roots. If the minimum doses were estimated with
the slowly rotating horizontal clinostat, the value was similar (Perbal and Driss-Ecole, 1994) or smaller
(Volkmann and Tewinkel, 1996) than those obtained in space. Because a decrease in starch has been reported
in space-grown roots (Volkmann et a1., 1986; Moore et a1., 1986), an increase in gravisensitivity under
microgravity can not be explained by the changes in the amyloplast development. Perbal et a1. (1997)
preposed one hypothesis that the increase in gravisensitivity may be due to the difference in tensions loaded
to the actin network via different amyloplast distribution (Perbal et a1., 1997).

The studies on graviresponsiveness of space-grown plant shoots were limited (Table 4), as in the case for
automorphogenesis (Table 2). In oat coleoptiles, gravireaction in space was compared with that on the ground
(Brown et a1., 1995). However, for this experiment, oat seedlings grown on a 1 g centrifuge on orbit were
used. By the difference in graviresponsiveness of intermediate-starch mutants inArabidopsis hypocotyls, Kiss
et a1. (1998) suggested that the hypocotyls of seedlings grown in space were less sensitive to gravity than
those grown on the ground, but the idea is based on indirect evidence. So far, the effect of gravity on the
development of statocytes in shoots has not been examined enough in space, nor the sensitivity of space-
grown shoot organs to the gravity has been compared with that of 1 g controls. Also in STS-95 mission, this
t0pic was not investigated.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The results obtained in the RICE experiment during Space Shuttle STS-95 ﬂight on morphogenesis of
plant seedlings were discussed in reference to those observed on the 3-D clinostat and in the past space
experiments. The ubiquitous occurrence of automorphogenesis under microgravity conditions was confirmed.

However, the mechanisms inducing automorphogenesis in microgravity have not been throughly addressed

in this mission. Also, it has become apparent that there are clear differences in graviresponsiveness between

plant seedlings grown under microgravity and at 1 g, and between shoots and roots. Space experiments on
this problem so far carried out are insufficient. These problems should be clarified by the future space
experiments in the International Space Station.

REFERENCES

Brown, A. H., D. K. Chapman, A. J ohnsson, and D. Heathcote, Gravitr0pic Responses of the Avena
ColeOptile in Space and on Clinostats. I. Gravitr0pic Response Thresholds, Physiol. Plant., 95, 27-33,
1995.

Buchen, B., T. Hoson, S. Kamisaka, Y. Masuda, and A. Sievers, Development of Statocyte Polarity under
Simulated Microgravity on a 3-D Clinostat, Biol. Sci. Space, 7, 111-115, 1993.

Heathcote, D. G., D. K. Chapman, and A. H. Brown, Nastic Curvatures of Wheat Coleoptiles that Develop
in True Microgravity, Plant Cell Environ., 18, 818-822, 1995.

Hoson, T., Automorphogenesis of Maize Roots under Simulated Microgravity Conditions, Plant Soil, 165,
309-314, 1994.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, B. Buchen, A. Sievers, M. Yamashita, and Y. Masuda, Possible use of a 3-D
Clinostat to Analyze Plant Growth Processes under Simulated Microgravity C0nditions,Adv. Space Res.,
17 (6/7), 47-53, 1996.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, Y. Masuda, and M. Yamashita, Changes in Plant Growth Processes under
Microgravity Conditions Simulated by a Three-Dimensional Clinostat, Bot. Mag., 105, 53-70, 1992.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, Y. Masuda, M. Yamashita, and B. Buchen, Evaluation of the Three-Dimensional
Clinostat as a Simulator of Weightlessness, Planta, 203, S187-S197, 1997.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, R. Yamamoto, M. Yamashita, and Y. Masuda, Automorphosis of Maize Shoots
under Simulated Microgravity on a Three—Dimensional Clinostat, Physiol. Plant., 93, 346-351,
19953.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, R. Yamashita, and Y. Masuda, Morphogenesis and Cell Wall Changes in Maize
Shoots under Simulated Microgravity Conditions, Biol. Sci. Space, 9, 337-344, 1995b.

Hoson, T., S. Kamisaka, M. Yamashita, and Y. Masuda, Automorphosis of Higher Plants on a 3-D Clinostat,
Adv. Space Res., 21, 1229-1238, 1998.

Hoson, T., K. Soga, R. Mori, M. Saiki, K. Wakabayashi, S. Kamisaka, S. Kamigaichi, S. Aizawa, I.
Yoshizaki, C. Mukai, T. Shimazu, K. Fukui, and M. Yamashita, Morphogenesis of Rice andArabidopsis

"
"8","940 T. Hoson et al.
Seedlings in Space, J. Plant Res., 112, 477-486, 1999.

J ohnsson, A., C. Karlsson, T. H. Iversen, and D. K. Chapman, Random Root Movements in Weightlessness,
Physiol. Plant., 96, 169-178, 1996.

Kiss, J . Z., R. E. Edelmann, and P. C. Wood, Gravitropism of Hypocotyls of Wild-Type and Starch-Deficient

Arabidopsis Seedlings in Spaceﬂight Studies, Planta, 209, 96-103, 1999.

Kiss, J . Z., W. J . Katembe, and R. E. Edelmann, Gravitropism and Development of Wild-Type and Starch-
Deficient Mutants of Arabidopsis during Spaceﬂight, Physiol. Plant., 102, 493—502, 1998.

Kiss, J . Z., J . B. Wright, and T. Caspar, Gravitmpism in Roots of Intermediate—Starch Mutants inArabidopsis,
Physiol. Plant., 97, 237-244, 1996.

Knight, C. D., and D. J . Cove, The Polarity 0f Gravitropism in the Moss Physcomitrella patens is Reversed
during Mitosis and after Growth on a Clinostat, Plant Cell Environ., 14, 995-1001, 1991.

Legué, V., F. Yu, D. Driss-Ecole, and G. Perbal, Effects of Gravitropic Stress on the DeveIOpment of the
Primary Roots of Lentil Seedlings Grown in Space, J. Biotechnol., 47, 129-135, 1996.

Lorenzi, G., and G. Perbal, Root Growth and Statocyte Polarity in Lentil Seedling Roots Grown in
Microgravity or on a Slowly Rotating Clinostat, Physiol. Plant, 78, 532—537, 1990.

Moore, R., W. M. Fondren, E. C. Koon, and C. L. Wang, The Inﬂuence of Gravity on the Formation of
Amyloplasts in Columella Cells of Zea mays L., Plant Physiol., 82, 867-868, 1986.

Perbal, G., and D. Driss-Ecole, Sensitivity of Gravistimulus 0f Lentil Seeding Roots Grown in Space during
the IML 1 Mission of Spacelab, Physiol. Plant., 90, 313-318, 1994. '

Perbal, G., D. Driss-Ecole, M. Tewinkel, and D. Volkmann, Statocyte Polarity and Graviscnsitivity in
Seedling Roots Grown in Microgravity, Planta, 203, SS7-S62, 1997.

Pfeffer, W., Pﬂanzenphysiologie, vol. 2, W. Engelmann, Leipzig, 1904.

Schulze, A., P. J . J ensen, M. Desrosiers, J . G. Buta, and R. S. Bandurski, Studies on the Growth and Indole-3-
Acetic Acid and Abscisic Acid Content of Zea mays Seedlings Grown in Microgravity, Plant Physiol.,
100, 692-698, 1992.

Sievers, A., B. Buchen, D. Volkmann, and Z. Hejnowicz, Role of the Cytoskeleton in Gravity Perception, in
The Cytoskeletal Basis of Plant Growth and Form, edited by W. Lloyd, pp. 169-182, Academic Press,
Iondon, 1991.

Smith, J . D., L. A. Staehelin, and P. Todd, Early Root Cap Deve10pment and Graviresponse in White Clover
(Trifolium repens) Grown in Space and on a Two-Axis Clinostat, J. Plant Physiol., 155, 543-550,
1999. .

Takahashi, H., H. Mizuno, M. Kamada, N. Fujii, A. Higashitani, S. Kamigaichi, S. Aizawa, C. Mukai, T.
Shimazu, K. Fukui, and M. Yamashita, A Space-Flight Experiment for the Study of Gravimorphogenesis
and Hydrotmpism in Cucumber Seedlings, J. Plant Res., 112, 497-505, 1999.

Ueda, J ., K. Miyamoto, T. Yuda, T. Hoshino, S. Fujii, C. Mukai, S. Kamigaichi, S. Aizawa, I. Yoshizaki, T.
Shimazu, and K. Fukui, Growth and DeveIOpment, and Auxin Polar Transport in Higher Plants under
Microgravity Conditions in Space: BRIC-AUX on STS-95 Space Experiment, J. Plant Res., 112, 487-
492, 1999.

Volkmann, D., H. M. Behrens, and A. Sievers, DeveIOpment and Gravity Sensing of Cress Roots under
Microgravity, Naturwissenschaﬁen, 73, 438-441, 1986.

Volkmann, D., and M. Tewinkel, Gravisensitivity of Cress Roots: Investigations of Threshold Values under
Specific Conditions of Sensor Physiology in Microgravity, Plant CeIl Environ, 19, 1195-1202, 1996.

"
