"","x"
"1","2011 IEEEIASME International Conference on
Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (A|M2011)
Budapest, Hungary, July 3-7, 2011
Problems and Requlrements for a Chameleon-lee Serv1ce Robot 1n
Space Statlon
Hui Li, Marco Ceeearelli, Qiang Huang and Giuseppe Carbone

Abstract— In this paper we have outlined design arms have been applied so far, for example Canadarrn2 and
considerations and design solutions for a structure of a Robonaut. Plans for large orbital stations have motivated a
Chameleon'like l‘ObOt for space applications in Space stations. renewed interest in developing hurnan-like robots and other
gegulregients and Cblial‘actel‘lSJICS are glscussedt Wlth t3: 1:""me structures, as the recent programs of national space stations,

6 lile . eSlgn 1m.) 6.1m .2111. (?pelia Ion ea “res a glve like US, China, Europe, and Russia [2] - [4].

motlvatlon for a blomlmetlc Insplratlon to chameleons. Thus, a , , ,
study of feasibility is described as referring to a design with a For example, .CanadarrnZ 1s deSIgned by Canadlan Space
basic kinematic structure mimicking the chameleon design and Agency and 15 used rnalnly for payload handllng,
operation. extra—vehieular activity support and international space station
(188) assembly. The Canadarrn2 Will also be used for the
1. INTRODUCTION service and maintenance of the 188, the transport of payloads
A eeording to the International Federation of Robotics Oh the Mobile Transporter/Mobile Remote SerVieer Base
(IFR), ""a service robot is a robot Which operates semi or System, as well as for the berthing/de-berthing of the Orbiter
fully autonomously to perform services useful to the well [5]- Canadarrn2 can ride from one end 0f the station to the
being of human and equipment, excluding manufacturing other on a mobile transporter, which Wlll is guided along the
operations"". giant truss beam. If a work location is too distant for the arm to

Therefore, a service action can be understood as a complex reach while Stih attached to the transporter, the arm can
set of operations that can achieve goals With a variety of connect an intermediate grapple ﬁxture. Electrical power W111
aspects, in manipulation and transportation but also in dealing be rerouted through that ﬁxture. The Canadarrn2 W111 then
with interactions With environment and human beings as users release 1tS other end and “inehworrn” 1tself through sueeess1ve
01‘ operators or assisted person [1] ﬁxtures until 1t reaCheS the deSired Site [6].

Since a decade service robots have addressed great attention Robonaut is a humanoid robot designed by the Robotic
for developing new robotic systems for new applications even Systems Technology Branch at NASA’S Johnson Space
in no technical areas. Typical robots are already developed for Center 1h a collaborative effort Wlth DARPA [7l- Robonaut
medical care, space exploration, dernining operation, can reduce the burden of extravehieular activity and planetary
surveillance, entertainrnent, museum guide and many other no exploration 0h astronauts and 3150 serve in rapid response
industrial applications. In some cases results are even already eapaeities [81 Robonaut has a Single seven DOFS leg Wlth the
available in the market. A considerable literature is available sarne interface to the spacecraft foot restra1nts as an end
not only on technical issues but it is not reported in the paper effector. Once anchored to a spacecraft, the hhhtl'JOlhted leg
for space limits. provides a greater amount of body rnobility than even a human

Speciﬁc activity has been developed in the past for possible erewrnernber. Additionally, Robonaut B is designed to have a
designs of robots in space applications, but only few robotic grapple ﬁxture 011 Its back, allow1ng 1t to be maneuvered by

larger Space Shuttle and Space Station arms [9].

This work was supported by Basic Scientiﬁc Research (Grand No. Canadarrn2 and RObonaut are all well deSigned9 but they
A2220080252), National Science Foundation for Distinguished Young can be considered too complicated to be repaired When they
Scholar under (60925014)= ""111 Projeet"" (Greht NO- 308043)» and the have failures. They can only move on special interfaces. The
National ngh Technology Research of China (863 PrOJect) (Grant . . . .

No.2009 A A0 42207) speeial interfaces are complicated, and do not be 1nstalled on

Hui Li and Qiang huang are with School of Mechatronical Engineering, the entire space station. Therefore Canadarrn2 and Robonaut
Beijing Institute of Technology, Haidian District, Beijing, 100081, China. cannot move Within the entire space station.

(Phone: 8610-68913111; fax: 8610-68915812; email: lihui2011@bit.edu.cn, I h. bl f d - - f
qhuang@bit.edu.cn). n t is paper, pro ems or e's1gn1ng. a structure or a

MaerO (3600mm and Giuseppe Carbone are with Department Of serV1ee robot1n applications for orb1tal stations are approached
Méchanjcs, Strugturés, EnvirOpmGHtand Térritory,UniV€rsity ofeassinp, Via by analyzing peculiarities of the application With the aim to
G' D1 13.121819” 43 ,Cass1no, 03043” Italy' (ceccarelll@unlcas'lt’ propose a reliable solution With reduced DOFs and ﬂexibly
carbone@unicas.1t)

978-1-4577-0839-8/11l$26.00 ©2011 IEEE 463

"
"2","features. management Will be included both in R&D and design of
service robots, even since the beginning.
II. SERVICE ROBOTS DESIGN Challenges for service robots can be understood in general
Recently, more service robots are developed With the aim to as [1]:
perform operations in speciﬁc n0—industria1tasks, Whose main ' operating for human users, With suitable behaviours and
characteristics are related With interactions With the careful users-friendly operation;
environment, including often human beings. Thus, those ' operating service tasks With proper easy-operation modes
robots do a service as a complete task With their actions, Which at user-oriented 005t-
are often much more extended and complicated that in
industrial applications. In addition, even the speciﬁcity of the 111' DESIGN AND OPERATION PROBLEMS AND REQUIREMENTS
service goals require different solutions both for design and The 188 is aninternationa11y developed research facility that
operation, and a large variety of robots and mainly robotic is being assembled in low Earth orbit, as shown in Fig. 2.
systems have been and can be still developed. In fact, a On-orbit construction of the station began in 1998 and is
considerable literature is available With proposals of a large scheduled for completion by late 2011. The station is expected
variety of service robots, by emphasizing on design issues as to remain in operation until at least 2015 , and likely 2020. The
well as on operation success With procedures and algorithms ISS serves as a research laboratory that has a microgravity
that can be used speciﬁcally but in general for a variety of environment in Which crews may conduct experiments in
cases. Indeed, a general approach can be outlined only With biology, chemistry, human biology, physics, astronomy and
general guidelines, and even in this respect there are still meteorology [11].
several challenges to be not only attached but even defined, as
for example pointed out in the very recent Strategic Agenda in \€\
EUROP 2009 [10]. . . . .0 ‘_ ' \.
Referrlng the technical aspects, Fig. 1 summarizes the ‘_ ‘ .. “git:
mechatronic character of a service robot, as a traditional robot, \im“. ,‘T‘f'a' . 1
but With speciﬁc emphasis to those above-mentioned )3?” .353“ .9; - . '7 I _.
peculiarities in terms of interactions With env1r0nment and w v; » _. :7; . - ‘4
human beings, and in term of a careful consideration of the . \Q. _‘-~_ ]
environment. Those interactions should be understood not T‘E“ __ ‘1
only in terms of engineering (mainly mechanical ones) issues “ - ‘ ' -. ‘ '
but by looking at more general aspects, like for example Fig. 2. The international space station.
psychological attitudes and social impact [1]. A consideration The spac e station was not c 0115thth by spac e robots, but
Of the enylionment sh0u1d 1nclude a1s0 hovy a‘serV1ce robot by many hours of human extravehicular activities With the
affects e1“. it is affected by it, by ana1y21ng des1gn1ng the variety assistan c e of Shuttle Remote Manipulator System (SRMS,
Of conditions and s1tuat10ns. Canadarm) and Space Station Remote Manipulator System
environment interactions (SSRMS, CanadarmZ) [12].
- Because 188 is still under construction, and some other
- space stations Will be constructed, there are too much
Science MECHATRONICS . . . . .
assembhng, repalrlng and monitoring work for the astronauts
/.;\A to do. Because of radiation, space debris, upper atmospheric
production& design & drag and spacecraft electrostatic charging, the space station
OdOpTOTion Opemﬁo” can be broken in any place. In addition, too much work is
Fig. 1. A general scheme for mechatronic design of service robots. expected, and the space environment iS very dangerous for
In addition, service robots, mainly for sp a c e applications, astronauts, therefore space robots are urgently needed to be
can be considered efﬁcient and successful When ultimately the developed to ass1st or replace astronauts.
cost, both in design and operation, can be properly sized as There are some famous space robots such as Robonaut and
function of the service task and mainly as function of the Canadarm2. These robots have many degrees Of freedom,
affordable budget of users and operators, and planned project comphcated conti01 _ systems, and they ca,“ do many
programs. Thus, indeed, economic evaluation and extravehicular act1V1t1es, but they. are very difﬁcult to be
repaired When they have some failures, and they can only
464

"
"3","move to special places of the space station at present. The peculiarities of the space environment and its
Therefore, it has great interest to develop a new kind of space constraints require novel solutions for a space robot With
robots that can work on the entire place of space stations With capability of service operations Within the outside structure of
simple structure. a space station. A biomimetic inspiration for design
The application of a service robot in a space orbital station architectures and motion strategies can be obtained by looking
can be characterized and constrained by environment at chameleon animals, Which move slowly but ﬁrmly in
characteristics and operation tasks. The space environment is intricate environments, With reduced mobility structures. They
characterized by the following aspects: have legs that they use also as arms With an extremity With two
A. Low gravity ﬁngers only. Those two ﬁngers show a very powerful structure
The condition of low gravity acting on the robot makes With a large mobility in grasping rods or in contacting surface
motion easier but also very sensitive to be effected by as a foot. In addition, they use the tail as an additional arm to
unexpected actions, even if of small magnitude. free two legs for other tasks by achieving a three-point
B. Strong radiation grasping conﬁguration, as shown in Fig. 3. In general, a
Radiation causing from the sun but also from the space, can chameleon moves slowly With the aim to achieve safe and
be dangerous and even affecting the execution of actuators and reliable postures during its motions, likewise it is needed in
electronic devices. space stations by astronauts. This gives also the possibility to
C. Drastic temperature change reduce the power that is needed for the movement and
Temperature changes drastically and temperature difference operation, by concentrating the force requirements in the
of an object between the sunny side and on the shady side is extremity for attaching the surface of rod along it moves. Thus,
large. Temperature control device should be added on the a chameleon has legs With reduced size With respect to the
robot to make the robot survive in the drastic temperature body transport.
changes, and large temperature difference environment. Summarizing, a charneleon-like robot for space service
D. Lack of energy source operations can be characterized by having legs With reduced
In orbital stations, energy source is very limited and size and motion power but With the possibility to be used as
therefore energy consumption must be kept at the lowest level arms, and by being equipped With a hand/foot extremity With
as possible. only two powerful ﬁngers that can be adjusted to grasp rods or
E. Hard to transport things attach surfaces during walking actions.
In order to make the transportation of the space service
robot to space station easier, the robot should as light and small IV. PROPOSED ROBOT STRUCTURE
as possible. In general, there are many rods outside a space station, and
Similarly, operation tasks of space service robot in serVing it is easy and cheap to install new rods on space station, as
in orbital stations can be characterized by speciﬁc aspects as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, a kind of charneleon—like robot, as
the following: shown in Fig.4, can walk along the rods likewise a chameleon
A- Autonomy walks on the branches. A charneleon-like robot can help
A robot helps or cooperates With the astronauts to in the astronauts in the assembling, repairing and monitoring. The
assembling, repairing and monitoring. The robot should robot can move in any place of the space station. In addition,
autonomous work even without astronautS- the robot is small, light and highly reliable with suitable
B- Fullrnobility mechanism design.
A robot should work on any place 0f the space station. A charneleon-like robot is composed of one trunk and three
m 5‘ ' _ ‘ legs. Camera can be installed on the trunk platform.
“— F- .» ‘. ./ End-effectors and other tools can be also installed on the trunk
“3% _ [l platform, for the robot participating in the assembling,
-' mggyfrfi‘; repairing and monitoring work. Each leg is composed of one
afv . - - v ball joint and one normal rotary joint, and has four DOFs. The
' '5 3%? 51% four DOFs ensure that the robot can move straight, change
i A39 “‘tt \ﬂtgz direction on the rods and have good mobile performance. In
«~ / X7"" .55.:‘% order to ensure the robot can move ﬁrmly on the rods, a
'1 ' 7' ‘ gripper is installed on each leg extremity With one DOF and it
Fig. 3. A chameleon animal in its peculiar posture for 3D mobility. can grasp the rod t1ghtly.
465

"
"4","As shown in Fig.4, the robot has three legs, When the ﬁrst Fig. 5 shows a mechanical design for the shoulder
leg grasps the rod, the other two legs can cooperate to work. mechanism, Which is the key part for generating three rotations
When the robot moves With two legs, the third leg can do some R1, R2 and R3 by one motor. In fact, it is a gearing system
other tasks. A conﬁguration With the three legs is symmetrical, Which consists of spur gears, bevel gears, worms and worm
and ensures that the robot is easy to be maintained. Wheels. Clutches are assembled on the rotating aXis. By

It is difficult to send heavy or large things to the space Changing the states of the Clutches, the gearing system can be
station, so the size of the robot should be small. The length of restructured. Furthermore, the reduction ratios of gear trains
linkl is 250mm, the length of link2 is 200mm, and the lengths contribute to improve the rnotor’s payload ability.
of trunk sides are 300mm. In addition the robot leg can also be Table I gives the operations of Clutches When the arm has
folded to reduce its volume, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). Because of only one output rotation at a time. In Table I, “0” means that a
its small size, the robot can arrive to almost everywhere. Clutch is disconnected and “1” means that a Clutch is connected.

These operations can be easily controlled by switch signals. In
addition, by combining the properly the activation of the
Clutches, composed rotations can be easily obtained up to full
spherical motion of the shoulder.
Hand/foot TABLE I
extremity THE CLUTCH OPERATION FOR ROBOT
V Lin“ Chlt9h Cla Clb C2a C2b C3
Rotat1on
Link2 R1 1 O O 1 1
R2 0 l l O l
(a) (b) R3 0 1 1 1 0
Fig. 4. A sketch of the proposed structure of a chameleon-like robot for space . . . . .
applications: (a) Full stretched conﬁguration; (b) Folded conﬁguration. In Table I and Flg. 5 , the operation IS summarized as in the
The eharneleon shoulder has three DOFs. However, in most follow1ng description: Clutch Cla activates R1 rnotlon, When
. gear G2a drives gear G2b. Since G2b is ﬁxed on the base, the
ease Charneleons move straightly. When the Charneleons move , ,
. box of shoulder is driven and rotates the shoulder. Clutch C2a
stra1ghtly, only one DOF of the shoulder rotates. The other two , , , , ,
. . activates R2 rnotion, When the active gear tra1n eons1sts of Gla,
DOFs only be used When the Charneleons Change direction, so , ,
. G2a, and Wla. Clutch C3 activates R3 rnotion, When Clutch
two DOFs are not used usually. The eharneleon-like robot has , , , , ,
. . . C3 is disconnected, and the active gear tra1n eons1sts of Wla
the same s1tuation. Therefore, a Clutches mechanics shoulder , , , ,
. and Wlb. In addition, the Clutch Clb is used to lock R1 motion
can be des1gned. . . . .
While Cla is disconnected, and Clutch C2b is used to lock R2
AF A-A motion While C2a is disconnected. For R3 rnotion, worrns
Wla and worrn Wheels Wlb are used for the motion
‘1, a a R3 _ RZ‘ transmission. The self locking feature of worrn combinations
cm 8 ”‘6 U 8 ; _ lli Wla eliminates additional locking systems.
wm
V. SIMULATIONS
- -
cm The Charneleon-like robot has two rnov1ng rnodes, namely
R - one is the revolving mode, and the other is the walking mode.
A ,, R1 In the revolving mode, the legs grasp the rod in turns, and the
(a) (b) trunk of the robot rotates When the robot moves. In the walking
_ _ _ _ mode, the robot moves only by two legs, the two legs grasp the
Flg. 5. A scheme for a mechanlcal des1gn of the-propo-sed shoulder mechanlsm 1‘0 (1 in turns, and the thi 1‘ (1 leg (1 0 e S not t0 p arti C i p at e t O the
(a) Wlth components and man assembly, (b) Wlth a V1ew of sectlon A-A. . .
. . . . walklng, and it can do some other tasks.

As shown in Fig. 5, by us1ng the Clutches, only one rnotor1s In order to identify the motion capacity Of the robot,
used to operate the ball joint, in order to reduce the cost but not simulations are carried out in ADAMS. The ﬁrst simulation
to reduce the IObOt straightly moving speed. At LARM» considers that the robot moves straight along the rod in
preyious works and experiments on clutched arms have been revolving mode. In the second simulation, robot Changes
successfully developed as reported in [l3], [14].

466

"
"5","direction on rods in revolving mode. In the third simulation, direction on the rod in revolving mode can be summarized as
robot moves straight along the rod in walking mode. In the last following: the leg A grasps the rod, and the robot trunk rotates.
simulation, robot changes direction on rods in walking mode. The leg C moves above to the other rod and moves down.
Results are shown in Fig. 6 to Fig. 11. Therefore, the leg C and leg A grasp the rod at the same time.
As shown in Fig. 6 (a) to Fig. 6 (d), gait of robot straight Then leg only C grasps the rod, the robot trunk rotates and the
movement on the rod in revolving mode can be summarized as legs grasp the rod by turns, then the changing direction
following: the leg C grasps the rod, the robot trunk rotate, and ﬁnishes as shown in Fig. 7 (d).
then the leg B and leg C grasp the rod at the same time. The
robot trunk rotates and the legs grasp the rod by turns, and the B B B
robot can move forward and backward on the rod. . ‘_
B ' B A , A "" _
.’ . A . CT xanm 1:3.
I B ~ I (a) (b) (c)
.' C C\~..
‘ i ' — . .3” 9“
(a) (b) (c) (d) B B B
Fig. 6. A simulation With robot moving straight along the rod by means of 3... A ,
revolving mode. ""
B B B B; C t A C ,A A C A
.' (d) (e) (f)
A C A A l Fig. 9. A simulation With robot changing direction on rods by means of
. ‘ C __ C . A walking mode.
A As shown in Fig. 8, gait of robot straight movement on the
(a) (b) (C) (d) rod can be summarized as following:
Fig. 7. A simulation With robot changing direction on rods by means of 1) The leg A mOVCS 11p and fOTWEl—l‘d, 3—5 ShOWIl in Fig. 8 (a)
reVolVing mode- and Fig. 8 (b), then moves down and grasps the rod again, as
shown in Fig. 8 (c) and Fig. 8 (d).
B B B B 2) The leg C moves up and forward, as shown in Fig. 8 (e)
” and Fig. 8 (t), then moves down and grasps the rod again, as
shown in Fig. 8 (g) and Fig. 8 (h).
. . l, A The robot trunk can be move While legs A leg C move. After
n c’ A C A ‘A the two steps, the robot can move forward or backward. The
§- -- 9. l ' leg A and the leg C take turns to move as above mentioned two
(a) (b) (C) (d) steps to ﬁnish the straight motion on the rod.
As shown in Fig. 9, gait of robot changing direction on rods
B B B B . .
t y can be summarized as follow1ng:
1) The leg C moves up and forward above the other rod, as
__ A shown in Fig. 9 (a), then moves down and grasps the rod, as
. C shown in Fig. 9 (b).
Ci‘""‘it2¢, A A C Aii‘trz n 2) The leg A moves up and forward, then move down grasp
(e) ' (f) ‘ (g) ‘ (h) the rod again, as shown in Fig. 9 (c).
, , , , , , The front leg and the back leg take turns to move as above
Flg. 8. A s1mu1at10n W1th robot mov1ng stralght along the rod by means of . . . . .
walking mode. mentioned two steps to realize changlng directlon on rods, as
_ _ _ shown in Fig. 9 (d) to Fig. 9 (f). After the leg A grasps the
AS shown in Fig. 7 (a) to Flg' 7 (d)? gait 0f robot changing other rod, robot ﬁnishes the changing direction.
467

"
"6","4° . anywhere outside the space station, since it has simple
0 _ E _ ﬂ _ § ..,.“ been validated with simulation results, and simulation results
i validate the feasibility of the proposed design solution with
a _40
,0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
_80 9 3 :— TOW 016190me The ﬁrst author acknowledges the support of 111 P10] eet
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 . .
Time(seC) (Grant No. B08043) for a perlod of research at LARM 1n
Fig. 10. Computed torque of shoulder joint and elbow joint in leg A when Cassmo durlng 2010-2011'
robot moves straight in revolving mode.
20 . , REFERENCES
5 E :— Tor iue Ofshouler em
1 1m [1] Ceccarelli M., “New challenging applications for service robots:
5 1 problems and experiments,” Proceeding of IARP Workshop on Service
10 Robotics and NanoRobotics, Beijing, 2009, invited paper No.2.
g [2] Lapointe, J.-F., and Boulanger, P., “Live Virtual reality system for the
S 5 control and monitoring of space operations,” Proceedings of the 6th
E International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics &
0 _ Mﬂm . .. Automation in Space (I-SAIRAS 2001), 2001, 7 pages. NRC 44885.
(CD-ROM only).
_10 i i i 5 i J.,Steinmetz, B.-M.,""Advances in orbital robotics, "" In Proceedings of
0 1 2 Tim3e(sec) 4 5 6 the 2000 IEEE international Conference on Robotics & Automation, San
Francisco, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2000, pp. 898 — 907.
Fig. 11. Computed torque of shoulder joint and elbow joint in leg A when [4] Hirzinger, G- SPORT, N- SCthl, M- Butterfass, J- Grebenstein, M»
robot moves straight in walking mode. ""Robotics and mechatronics in aerospace,"" 7th International Workshop
. . . on Advanced Motion Control, 2002, pp. 19 - 27
In Flg. 10 and Flg. 11, computed torque for a leg 1S reported [5] Stieber, M..F, Trudel, C.P., Hunter, D.G., ""Robotic systems for the
to Check and show the feasibility of the proposed design and its [nemahonal SPalca Stat10n="" 11% Pmcaadmgs Pf tha 2000 IEEE
. . . . . . 1nternat1ona1 Conference on R0b0t1cs & Automat10n,1997, pp. 3068 -
Operatlon 1n both InOVlng modes. It IS worth to note the 111n1ted 3073
values of the needed torque and its smooth time history. Those [6] MD Robotics, “Mobile Servicing System — Data Sheet,” Brampton,
aspects can conﬁrm the feasibility of the proposed design in Ontario: Canada: MD RObOtiCS= 2002-
terms 0 f 10w-ener consum tion [7] Robert O. Ambrose, Hal Aldridge, R. Scott Askew, Robert R. Burridge,
gy p ' _ _ William Bluethmann, Myron Diftler, Chris Lovchik, Darby Magruder,

The Strueture Of the Chameleon rObOt 15 very snnple, every and Fredrik Rehnmark, “Robonaut: NASA’s Space Humanoid,”

leg only has two {notors9 and the hand/foot only has two Intelligent Systems and their Applications, IEEE, V01. 15, Jul/Aug 2000,
' i 11 n1 n In r.H r h f r 131057—63 .
ﬁngers a nd 1s (11‘ V6 0 y by 0 e OtO , OWCVC ’ byt e 0U [8] W. B1uethmann,R. Ambrose,R. D1ft1er, S. Askew,E. Huber,M. Goza,F.
ShhhlathhSa by the means Of bOth l‘eVOIVlng mede ahd walklhg Rehnmark, C. Lovchik, and D.Magruder. Robonaut, “A robot designed
mode, the Chameleon-like robot can move straight and Change to work with humans in space,” Autonomous Robots, 2003, pp.179-198.
direction on the rods. The simulations prove the [9] Robert O. Ambrose, Robert T. Savely, S. Michael, Myron A. Diﬁler,
h 1 1k 1) k h . d h Ivan Spain, Nicolaus Radford, “Mobile Manipulation using NASA’s
C ame .6011- 1 6 1‘0 0t can W01“ on t 6 space statlon, an t e Robonaut,” Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on
ﬂeX1b111ty and the m0b111ty 0f the Chameleon-hke robot have Robotics and Automation, 2004, pp. 2104-2109.
been validated. [10] EUROP, Robot Vision — to 2020 and Beyond, the Strategic Research
Agenda for European Robotics, Brussels, 2009.
[11] Uri, J.J. and Cooley, V., “International Space Station - a unique place for
V1- CONCLUSION research,” in Proceedings of IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2003, V01.1,
_ , . pp. I-91-100.

By anaIyzmg the operatlon prOblemS aed requlrements Of [12] Gibbs G, SachdeV S, ""Canada and the international space station
space statlon, a new klnd 0f Chameleon-hke robot has been program; overview and status,"" Acta Astronautica, 2002, 51(2),
proposed and simulated for helping astronauts to carry out pp-591-600- _ _ _
service operations like assembling, repairing and monitoring [13] H.810 G.u’ Marco ceccamlh and Glueeppe Carbone, DGSIgn ahd

, , , s1mu1at1on of a 1-DOF anthropomorph1c clutched arm for humanOId
WOl‘k outSIde space StathhS- The robot IS composed Of Ohe r0bots,”Internationa1Journal ofHumanoidRobotics, 2010, V01. 7,N0. 1,
trunk and three legs. By using the Clutches mechanism, each pp.157—182.
leg has only tWO motors but four DOFS. The Chameleon-like [14] Gu H., Ceccarelli M., “An Optimum Path Planning for LARM Clutched

b b 11 1. h d h b 1 Arm,” In Proceeding of the 12th International Symposium on Advances
10 0t can 6 sma a 15% t, an t e 10 0t can a mOSt mOVe to in RobotKinematics(ARK 2010), 2010,pp. 393—400.

468

"
