"","x"
"1","w Spinal Cord (2011) 49, 4—16
' ©2011InternationalSpinalCordSociety All rights reserved 1362-4393/11 $32.00
www.nature.c0m/sc
REVI EW
Challenges, concerns and common problems: phySIologIcal
consequences of spinal cord Injury and micrograVIty
JM Scottl, DER Warburtonl'Z'B, D Williams4, S Whelan4 and A Krassioukov3'4'5'6
ICardiovascular Physiology and Rehabilitation Laboratory, Department ofEducation, University ofBritish Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; ZFaculty ofExperimental Medicine, Department ofMedicine, University ofBritish Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; 3Internati0nal Collaboration 0n Repair Discoveries, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 4Department
ofSurgery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; 5Faculty ofPhysical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Department of
Medicine, University ofBritish Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada and 6Spinal Cord Program, GF Strong Rehabilitation
Centre, Vancouver Coastal Health, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Introduction: Similarities between the clinical presentation of individuals living with spinal cord injury
(SCI) and astronauts are remarkable, and may be of great interest to clinicians and scientists alike.
Objectives: The primary purpose of this review is to outline the manner in which cardiovascular,
musculoskeletal, renal, immune and sensory motor systems are affected by microgravity and SCI.
Methods: A comprehensive review of the literature was conducted (using PubMed) to evaluate the
hallmark symptoms seen after spaceflight and SCI. This literature was then examined critically to
determine symptoms common to both populations.
Results: Both SCI and prolonged microgravity exposure are associated with marked deteriorations
in various physiological functions. Atrophy in muscle and bone, cardiovascular disturbances, and
alterations in renal, immune and sensory motor systems are conditions commonly observed not only in
individuals with SCI, but also in those who experience prolonged gravity unloading.
Conclusion: The preponderance of data indicates that similar physiological changes occur in both SCI
and prolonged space flight. These findings have important implications for future research in SCI and
prolonged space flight.
Spinal Cord (2011) 49, 4—16; doi:10.1038/sc.2010.53; published online 25 May 2010
Keywords: SCI; spaceflight; muscle atrophy; orthostatic hypotension
Introduction
Two notable achievements of the latter half of the twentieth consequences of microgravity and SCI, this review will
century were human space travel and advancements in describe how cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, immune,
patient care following spinal cord injury (SCI). Both SCI and renal and sensory motor systems are affected by each
prolonged microgravity exposure are associated with marked condition. As this review deals primarily with long-term
deteriorations in various physiological functions. Atrophy (>24 h) adaptations to SCI and microgravity; the reader is
in muscle and bone, cardiovascular disturbances and an referred to other reviewsl‘3 for more detailed information
unbalanced immune response are other conditions com- outlining acute acclimation (<24 h) and the time course of
monly observed not only in individuals with SCI, but also in acclimation following these conditions. We hypothesized
those who have traveled in space for prolonged periods that microgravity and SCI would result in similar pathophy-
(Table 1). These similarities make it feasible for microgravity- siological adaptations. Furthermore, we hypothesized that
induced degeneration to provide an excellent experimental the study of SCI on earth provides a good model to evaluate
model for investigation of long-term deconditioning on the effects of prolonged spaceﬂight (and Vice versa).
Earth. Likewise, research examining how to improve the
physiological consequences of SCI could be applied for the Alterations in the cardiovascular system
treatment 0f maladaptations that occur during PIOIODSQd Recognition and management of cardiovascular dysfunction
spaceﬂight.Accordir1gly, to highlight common physiological following SCI and microgravity represent Challenging clin-
— ical issues. Diminished gravitational ﬂuid distribution in
Correspondence: Dr JM Scott, Exercise Physiology and Countermeasures, astronauts and a lack Of descending nervous control to the
NASAJthéon Space center’ 2101 NASA Parkway’ HOUSton’TX 77058’ USA' cardiovascular system in individuals with SCI result in
E-maII: JeSSIca.m.scott@nasa.gov
Received 13 October 2009; revised 10 April 2010; accepted 13 April 2010; thSiOIOgical alterations in several areas including ortho'
published online 25 May 2010 static tolerance, ventricular mass and function, vascular

"
"2","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
JM Scott et al '
5
Table 1 Comparison of physiological changes following spaceflight and SCI15
SCI Spaceflight
Cardiovascular
Orthostatic tolerance i Tolerance5 i Tolerance9
i Sympathetic nervous system activity26 $29; <—>18;T3’0 sympathetic nervous system activity
i Baroreflex response5 i Baroreflex response28
T Antidiuretic hormoness T Antidiuretic hormones16
i Plasma volume34 i Plasma volume16
Ventricular atrophy and dysrhythmias i Cardiac muscle mass37 i Cardiac muscle mass39
Vascular dysfunction T Arrhythmias3’7 T47 or <—>48arrhythmias
T FIow-mediated dilatation61 i FIow-mediated dilatation58
Lipid disorders T Low-density lipoproteins61 T Low-density lipoproteins68
T Total cholesterol61 T Total cholesterol68
i High-density lipoproteins61 i High-density lipoproteins68
Musculoskeletal
Muscle atrophy Denervation and disuse atrophy“82 Disuse atrophy73
i Extensor muscle function69 i Extensor muscle function73
i Cross sectional area72 i Cross-sectional area77
T Fast twitch85 T Fast twitch73
Bone loss i Bone mineral density88 T Bone mineral density76
<—> or T Bone formation markers88 <—> Bone formation markers76
T Bone resorption markers102 T Bone resorption markers76
T Fracture risk91'92 Likel T facture risk durin rolon ed missions76
Y 9 P 9
Other systems
Neurovestibular and sensory motor dysfunction i Motor function103 i Motorfunction105
Renal stones i Sensory function118 i Sensory function104
T Risk of stone formation108 T Risk of stone formation111
T Hypercalciuria108 T Hypercalciuria 111
Immune dysfunction T Urinary tract infection116 i Immune responsiveness120
i Immune responsiveness115
Abbreviation: SCI, spinal cord injury.
Note: Example references are provided.
function, and serum lipid levels. Although the symptoms and from short space shuttle ﬂights of 4—10 daysg'10 In longer-
Clinical presentation of cardiovascular dysfunction are very duration ﬂights, the prevalence is even greater, with up to
similar, underlying mechanisms and natural recovery/progres- 80% of astronauts experiencing orthostatic intolerance.4 The
sion differ greatly betweenindividuals with SCI and astronauts. extent to which SCI patients and returning astronauts are
prone to orthostatic hypotension can be seen in Figure 1.
O h , , l The left side shows changes in blood pressure and heart rate
Orthostatze mﬁo erance. . d' . h . 1 following passive movement from a supine t0 seated
drt 0stat1cd ypotension 15:11am. moi t at 15 commoh y position in a subject with SCI (C5 ASIA B; (Figure 1b)) in
ochmente 4m a(sitioneués .3 Olwmg; £516?er to grav1ty comparison to a healthy control volunteer (Figure 121). On
Environment an (11D. 13. 1V; u? 5 W1; SCI ' ymptemsl 1n the assumption of a passive seated position, the SCI subject
0; astrcfmautls :1 hmdlvci ua S Wétd. . are very. 51:11 at; exhibited a marked, progressive decrease in blood pressures
an varyé r31; 1g. t' ea e ness an. izzmesos todepiso es 0 and relative postural tachycardia. In contrast, in the control
:yncoge. filenﬁc exposgred ti? gllCI‘O-ElCthlt}; 111“ng opro- subject, blood pressures were increased following the change
ongoe space 1g} exten e ed :St. (2.11.1: el 0 01111138; in posture with little Change in heart rate. The right side
gravlity? OIdmaCOUVltil experienile h y in 1V1 luads Wlt compares postﬂight changes in astronauts during standing
gesubtloin a aﬁtive .C :nges, Wolc om turn eat to severe in finishers(white bars) and n0nfinishers(black bars)0fa 10-
15: ling olrt (13static ypotension in returning astronauts min stand test. Nonfinishers showed a tendency toward a
anOcmica W1) uﬁteers. f 11 . 1 d . d f greater percent increase in heart rate, whereas finishers
. on posthra C giggc?rf O 0w11ng pro enge p;;10 S 0d showed blood pressure increase to a significantly greater
s1tti3g,gat1ents Wltbl d requentiexplerighce sud. eh an extent during postﬂight standing compared with nonfin-
far: 1:6 actions in (:10 pressure olten ea 11178 t?) iﬁzmesos, ishers.11 It is interesting to note similarities in heart rate and
1g t' ea e “:55 a: d/OI. Synioﬁéy etrents. f rth 0stat1c blood pressure responses between SCI subject (left) and
maneuver per orme uring re. a 1 itation are urt eimote nonfinishers (black bars; right).
reported to induce a decrease in blood pressure, which is
diagnostic of orthostatic hypotension in 74% of patients
with SCI.8 As a result, this condition often affects an Mechanisms of orthostatic intolerance
individual’s ability to participate in rehabilitation programs SCI results in major alterations in activity of the sympathetic
and delays rehzclbilitation.8 Orthostatic intolerance has also nervous system. Indeed, in tetraplegic individuals there is a
been reported to occur in up to 30% of astronauts returning Virtual absence of spontaneous activity compared with
Spinal Cord

"
"3","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
' JM Scott et a/
6
a -
130 _ $ 80 Mean Blood Pressure Heart Rate
120 + 3V“ 90 90
A - I! h. 70 80 80
€110 1 ,f' 60 70
E 100? __ _ F 70
g 90+r;1.I1_f_:\gfmT:_/:M_,nhf-tvu111., um 50 E 60 60
(1) Q.
5 80: ‘40 E 50 50
g 70 ‘ ,fﬁnu‘h-D wﬂd’n‘ 30 I 40 40
g 60- 30 30 '
5 50 ; w“ “Hﬁo-‘tw’ﬂﬁ‘fﬁ 20 g 20 2o
40 10 8 * * '
' g 10 [—I 10
30 0 E 0 I I 0
o 5 1o 15 2o 25 30 5;
Time (mins) 8, '10 '10
§ -20 -20
b Upright O -30 -30
130 —T 80 _40 -40
120 _ f"" 70 -50 -50
a 110 .3“! “Jr“ Hvu-“h‘! “ ' _ _60
E 100 60 E :2 70
v 90 ""1""""! r - .ch‘ar-r'.‘ ' 11” 50 Q. _ -
g 80 H-*'“'/H\r""-...1I 40 E -80 -80
U) '. IL .I- _ _
<£70 ilﬂr’whlltso 90:15:13 90:13:15
1360 'ém'ém 'éuJ'éLu
9 50 20 59 ""g: 59 ""g; 59 ""g; 59 ""Eu
9 LL *5 5g 9 LL :7, 5g
30 0 0. DC: 0. DC:
0 5 1o 15 2o 25 3o
Time(mins)
Figure 1 Left: Blood pressure and heart rate responses to orthostatic stress in a healthy male control subject (a) and a man with chronic
cervical SCI (C5 AIS B; b). The SCI subject had complete destruction of descending autonomic pathways as assessed by the absence of
sympathetic skin responses. Resting systolic (SAP) and diastolic (DAP) arterial pressures were higher in the control than the SCI patient. Resting
heart rates (HR) were similar.5 Right: Comparison of changes during standing in finishers (white bars) and nonfinishers (black bars) of a 10-min
stand test in astronauts. Nonfinishers showed a tendency toward a greater percent increase in heart rate. Finishers showed an increase in blood
pressure to a significantly greater extent during postflight standing compared with nonfinishers. *P< 0.05 for finishers versus nonfinishers.9
Note the similarities in HR and blood pressure responses between SCI subject (left) and nonfinishers (black bars; right). (Figures reprinted with
permission).
normal subjects.11 Although parasympathetic control is between syncopal astronauts and individuals with SCI.13 A
usually preserved in SCI, the synergistic relationship comparison of responses in presyncopal and nonsyncopal
between parasympathetic and sympathetic control is often astronauts during their 10-min standing tests postflight
10st.12 The extent to which this disrupts autonomic control Clearly identified a subnormal increase in plasma norepi-
is directly related to the level at which SCI occurred.12 In nephrine in the presyncopal group as the critical difference
general, resting sympathetic tone in animals and humans from preﬂight data. Furthermore, presyncopal astronauts
with SCI is very low.11 This disruption of spinal sympathetic showed a preﬂight individual predisposition to being more
pathways likely affects vascular resistance responses to susceptible to postﬂight orthostatic intolerance Character-
orthostasis. Several investigations have shown that in ized by hypoadrenergic response during standing.20
individuals with SCI, levels of both adrenaline and nora- In contrast to maintained parasympathetic activity follow-
drenaline are abnormally 10w while in supine position,12 and ing SCI, a consistent decrease in the parasympathetic
that catecholamine levels fail to increase in response to an nervous system indicator has been observed following
orthostatic Challenge.13 It has been shown previously that microgravity exposure21 and bed restzz'23
these vascular resistance responses have a crucial role in Differences between sympathetic nervous system response
cardiovascular control during orthostatic stress,14 and that in patients with SCI(C0n1paredwith able-bodied individuals)
any impairment in vascular resistance responses following and in astronauts (postflight compared with preﬂight) can be
SCI will predispose to orthostatic intolerance.14 seen in Figure 2. The top graph illustrates mean voltage
Data on sympathetic nervous system function in space are neurograms from peroneal skin nerve fascicle in a normal
indirect, scarce and contradictory. Plasma noradrenaline subject and a tetraplegic patient (C6 lesion) at rest. Note
levels in space have been reported as decreased,15 un- frequent sympathetic bursts in the neurogram from the
changed16 or increased.17 Despite these inconsistent results, normal subject and only a single reﬂex burst induced by
it has been shown that muscle sympathetic nerve activity, in pressure over the bladder (arrow) in the tetraplegic patient.11
contrast to SCI, was increased in n1icrogravity,9'18 data that The bottom graph shows Valsalva maneuvers performed 72
are supported by most studies using sympathetic microneur— days before the Neurolab space shuttle mission and on
ography during simulated microgravity on Earth.19 However, mission day 12.30 Note the lack of sympathetic activity in
postﬂight results suggest similar sympathetic responses the SCI subject, while there is a greater augmentation of
Spinal Cord

"
"4","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
JM Scott et al '
7
Normal WW
1
Tetraplegic WW
I._—I
10 s
1750 Pre-flight Late mission
’6?
1500 ' l
‘E’ PM. I”. {’3
g 1250 .- :- ‘3 I L V'
2 t *""R 1; ""
E 1000 ” I 1 .' W
E 19.4““. J
0': 750 "" 1,1
500
200
9 i
<3 150 - - . 1 - - '
8 a I"" I I ."" I
5% l. IHIE Hm \‘Ihlirll‘H
g E 100 H u M}. l.“ m w I H H“ u. ._ .11."" 1‘11""
'5' .. 'i 'l'"" ' _ .. 1! '1 J_ 1‘1'Illlllllll""l“l11l . 'I
< '..'n,,'1l"".”-'| w I ‘
50 '
.9
3 a
g; ' I - Ill 1|
11 1 .1
>~. - ' I : l
0') g) | [M 1. . I '1‘ '
1t *1 ‘11 :11 111111111-
-10 O 10 2O 3O -10 O 10 2O 30
Time (s) Astronaut 2
Figure 2 Top: Mean voltage neurograms from peroneal skin nerve fascicle in a normal subject and a tetraplegic patient (C6 lesion) at rest.
Note frequent sympathetic bursts in the neurogram from the normal subject and only a single reflex burst induced by pressure over the bladder
(arrow) in the tetraplegic patient.11 Bottom: Valsalva maneuvers performed 72 days before the Neurolab space shuttle mission and on mission
day 12.30 Note the lack of sympathetic activity in the SCI subject, while there is a greater augmentation of muscle sympathetic nerve activity
during straining in space than on Earth. (Figures reprinted with permission).
muscle sympathetic nerve activity during straining in space baroreﬂex control in both high- and low-level lesions
than on Earth. identified in these studies is another probable factor
Altered baroreceptor reﬂex control may be another factor contributing to orthostatic intolerance in SCI. Indeed, Aslan
that contributes to impaired orthostatic tolerance. Baror— et al.27 examined blood pressure regulation during an
eceptors are stretch receptors located in the aortic arch, orthostatic stress test and found that SCI results in less
carotid sinus and coronary arteries that respond to perturba- engagement of feedback control.
tions in arterial pressure and reﬂexively modulate sympa- There have also been several reports documenting im-
thetic and parasympathetic outﬂow to maintain blood paired baroreﬂex responses after Space Shuttle missions.
pressure homeostasis.23 When assessed using spectral analy- Fritsch et al.28'29 examined astronauts with a stepwise neck
sis of oscillations in heart rate and blood pressure during pressure algorithm and found that the maximum slope and
orthostatic stress, baroreﬂex function has been found to be range of the sigmoidal relationship between carotid distend-
abnormal in patients with SCI with lesions at T3 or above.24 ing pressures and R—R intervals were significantly less than
Individuals with tetraplegia and paraplegia have also been preﬂight. Furthermore, the resting position (operational
reported to have impaired baroreﬂex responses to discrete point) of astronauts on this relationship was lower after the
stimulation of the carotid sinus using neck suction or neck space missions than before.30 A more recent investigation
pressure, resulting in reductions in both baroreceptor confirmed these findings, showing that the range, maximum
sensitivity and range of operation.25'26 The impairment of gain, and operational point of sigmoid carotid distending
Spinal Cord

"
"5","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
' JM Scott et al
8
pressure and R—R interval response relationships were all reduction in mass may be reversible. Nash 61‘ 011.38 described a
significantly lower in space than on Earth.18 The sigmoid 35% increase in LV mass with the introduction of an exercise
relationship between pressure and R—R intervals of heart rate program using electrical muscle stimulation in individuals
shows a downregulated resetting of the barorefleX response, with tetraplegia.37 These results show the importance of
which becomes apparent even after short (4—5 days) exercise as a countermeasure in maintaining cardiac integ-
exposure to microgravity. This reduced R—R interval response rity in individuals with SCI.
persists up to 10 days after landing, contributing to Similar to individuals with SCI, astronauts also experience
orthostatic hypotension.28 In summary, altered barorefleX cardiac atrophy. A recent investigation by Perhonen 61‘ 011.39
control and the resultant blunted sympathetic response may showed that LV mass measured by magnetic resonance
contribute to orthostatic intolerance both in individuals imaging, decreased by 15% during prolonged supine bed rest
with paraplegia and in astronauts postﬂight. in previously sedentary nonathletic men without cardiovas-
One final mechanism that may contribute to orthostatic cular disease, and decreased by 12% after short-duration
intolerance is altered salt and water balance. In able-bodied spaceflight.39 Although it seems that cardiac atrophy does
individuals, orthostatic tolerance and postural blood pres- not affect systolic function as it does in SCI, cardiac atrophy
sure control are known to be greatly inﬂuenced by plasma following spaceflight may affect diastolic function. Invasive
volume,31 whereby larger plasma and/or blood volumes are studies of cardiac performance before and after 2 weeks of
associated with better tolerance to orthostasis.32 In patients head-down-tilt bed rest have shown that there is a leftward
with chronic SCI, there is evidence of impaired water and shift in the diastolic pressure—volume curve after bed rest,
sodium retention, which is confounded by limited salt resulting in a smaller LV end-diastolic volume for any given
and water intake.33 There is only limited information filling pressure.40 Given that SCI seems to result in greater
available on circulating volume following SCI; however, it decreases in LV mass compared with spaceflight, differences
has also been shown that total blood volume and hemoglo- regarding decreases in diastolic function are intriguing.
bin mass are decreased in individuals with SCI with a lesion Although de Groot 61‘ 011.37 used echocardiography to assess
above T4.34 The combination of increased antidiuretic LV function following SCI, future investigations examining
hormone secretion, low sodium intake, high sodium excre- LV performance using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging39
tion and resultant hyponatremia are likely to predispose or invasive measures40 could also reveal decrements
toward lower plasma volumes in patients with SCI. This, in in diastolic performance in conjunction with changes in
turn, would exacerbate episodes of orthostatic hypotension LV mass.
in these individuals. Furthermore, there is evidence It is well recognized that SCI can provoke altered cardiac
that individuals with SCI respond well to plasma volume electrophysiology and increase susceptibility to cardiac
increase with use of fludrocortisone, suggesting that plasma arrhythmias. Sinus bradycardia (a heart rate <50 beats per
volume has an important role in maintaining orthostatic minute) is the most common heart rate abnormality in
tolerance.35 patients in the acute stage following SCI. However, various
Weightlessness also rapidly alters fluid physiology. Astro- other irregularities in cardiac rhythm have been attributed to
nauts experience a net volume loss of ~800 ml per day for autonomic instability following SCI, including repolariza-
the first 2 days.16 During the first day, adrenocorticotropic tion changes, atrioventricular blocks, supraventricular
hormones and antidiuretic hormones increase markedly and tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia and primary cardiac
astronauts diminish their ﬂuid and food intake until day 3, arrest.41'42 Development of heart rate abnormalities in
when they adapt to space sicl<ness.2'16 By the fifth day in patients with SCI is associated with severe injury at the
microgravity, plasma volume has diminished by up to cerVical or high-thoracic level.42 Furthermore, the most
20%,9'36 likely contributing to decreased orthostatic toler- pronounced changes are observed during the acute phase
ance upon return to gravity.9'36 (ranging from 2 to 6 weeks after injury), whereas heart rate
parameters can improve substantially in the chronic
stage.43'44 However, in the chronic stage, physical exertion
Ventricular atrophy and dysrhythmias and sexual activities are most commonly associated with
Decrease in cardiac mass to levels that are well below normal development of arrhythmias.45'46
occur in conditions of weightlessness, bed rest and SCI. In a In contrast to SCI, spaceflight does not seem to increase
study that examined changes in cardiac mass and dimen- the risk of dysrhythmias. One case study described a single
sions, de Groot 61‘ 011.37 reported a 25% decrease in left isolated nonsustained, asymptomatic 14-beat ventricular
ventricular (LV) mass in patients with chronic (average 18 tachycardia episode in a cosmonaut during an extended
years after injury) tetraplegia. Interestingly, in this investiga- space mission.47 However, subsequent analyses of electro-
tion, there were no reported differences in diastolic or cardiogram tracings of astronauts performing their routine
systolic function between individuals with SCI and controls tasks during or following their space missions revealed no
despite significant cardiac atrophy following SCI. de Groot greater incidence of cardiac dysrhythmias,48 and databases
61‘ 011.37 hypothesized that the LV dimensions, which decrease designed to examine electrocardiography tracings obtained
to maintain wall stress may be an appropriate response to from long-duration microgravity exposure have revealed no
inactivity without compromising cardiac function. Although pathology in the bioelectrical actiVity of the heart.49 It has
there are no data to our knowledge that describe the been proposed that less serious cardiac dysrythmias are
longitudinal decreases in LV mass in SCI, it seems that events not specifically related to spaceﬂight, but rather due
Spinal Cord

"
"6","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
WSCOtteI-‘al—'
9
to conditions such as transient myocardial inﬂammation, Cholesterol levels, and continue to maintain lowered HDL
electrolyte shifts, heat, pollutants and anxiety.49 Cholesterol levels compared with able-bodied populations.65
Individuals with tetraplegia tend to have a greater number of
, li id abnormalities than their ara le ic counter arts.66 This
Vascular dysfunction p . p p g . p . . .
. . . . . suggests that the metabolic changes and physical 1nact1V1ty
Prevrous studies have suggested that deconditioning can . . . . .
. . assocrated w1th SCI may have Significant consequences for the
lead to detrimental vascular Changes, such as endothehal . . . .
, , 50 , , prevalence of dyslipidemia and the development of cardio-
dysfunction and atherosclerosrs. Endothelial dysfunction, ,
. . . . . vascular disease.
an initial factor in the development of atherosclerosrs, has . . . . .
, , , , , Alterations in blood lipids have also been found during
a Significant effect on the long-term risk for cardiovascular . . .
, 51 , , exposures to m1crograv1ty. This may be a concern for long-
disease. A commonly used non1nvasrve assessment of . . . . . .
. . . . . . 52 , duration missions, a5 prevrous research indicates that the
arterial function 15 flow-mediated dilation. Flow-mediated . . . .
, , ,, , m1crograv1ty enVironment may induce or accelerate the
dilation reﬂects ability of the endothelium to relax vascular . . .
. . . development of 115k factors for cardiovascular disease.
smooth muscle in response to increased blood ve10C1ty- . . . .
. 53 . . . . Significant changes have been reported to occur in concen-
1nduced shear stress. Reduced flow-mediated dilation 15 an . .
. 52 trations of HDL cholesterol (decreased 8%) and low-densrty
early marker of atherosclerosrs, a surrogate marker of , , , .
, , 54 , , lipoprotein cholesterol (increased 6%) compared w1th
cardiovascular function, and a predictor of future cardio- . 67 . 68
, , 55 preﬂight values. Markin et al. also reported that, as early
vascular complications. . . . .
. . . as the second month of orbital ﬂight, the ma]ority of
Recent findings suggest that vascular adaptations to . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . 56 cosmonauts being tested experienced a Signiﬁcant increase in
1nact1V1ty in humans are accomplished w1th1n weeks, .
, , 57 total cholesterol concentrations (above the normal range). It
not, as was prevrously thought, over a longer period. In , ,
. . . . should, however, be noted that results from the later investiga-
humans w1th long-standing SCI, extensrve changes occur in . . . . .
. . . . tion may be somewhat limited by methodological constraints.
the peripheral Circulation such as a 30% decrease in . . . .
. . . . Cosmonauts were tested in ﬂight usrng capillary blood samples
diameter, a reduction in blood flow and an almost doubling , , 1 , , ,
, 56 , taken from a ﬁnger w1th Reﬂotron IV (Boehringer Mannheim,
of stress levels in the femoral artery. Interestingly, de Groot . . .
56 . . Mannheim, Germany) biochemical analyzer, a method that
61‘ al. showed that absolute and relative flow-mediated .
. . . . . . . . may not be as accurate as enzyme immunoassays.
dilation responses increased Significantly during the first 6
weeks of extreme inactivity, with most changes evident at 3
weeks after in'ur . . .
. 1. y . . . Alteratlons In the musculoskeletal system
De5p1te con51derable research examining endothehal func-
tion in various clinical populations, very little information Maintenance of the musculoskeletal system is of crucial
exists with regard to endothelial function of individuals importance to preservation of mobility in patients with SCI
subjected to bed rest or microgravity. In one investigation and in astronauts in space. Indeed in SCI, performance of
examining simulated microgravity, Hesse 61‘ 011.58 found that simple daily tasks, such as transfers and wheeling depend on
strict bed rest for 13 days impaired endothelium-dependent the ability of the muscular system to generate sufficient
arterial relaxation in healthy men. Furthermore, Coupe forces to enable displacement of the body. Likewise, in
61‘ 011.59 also showed that prolonged bed rest causes impair- spaceﬂight, not only does performance of daily tasks,
ment of endothelium-dependent functions at the micro- including particularly demanding ones such as extra-vehi-
Circulation level, along with an increase in circulating cular activities, rely on structural and functional integrity of
endothelial cells. Although ground-based evidence indicates the muscular system, but also the ability to eXit rapidly from
that microgravity may impair endothelial function, this the space vehicle in case of emergency. Bone health is
phenomenon has not yet been systematically tested. inherently tied to muscle function, wherein bone loss is
likely due to a decrease in mechanical loading a5 a result of
. . . reduced or complete loss of muscle function and/or weight-
szzd disorders . . . . . . .
. . . . bearing act1V1t1es. To decrease the risk of fragility fractures
Abnormal lipid values have long been established as risk , , , ,
. . 60 that result from bone loss, preservrng and maintaining bone
factors for the development of diabetes and heart disease. mass a fter S CI and s aceﬂi ht are crucial
After SCI, there is a tendency toward elevated low-density p g '
lipoprotein Cholesterol and total cholesterol, as well as lower
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) Cholesterol, levels compared Muscle atrophy
with able-bodied individuals.61 Approximately 10% of the After SCI, there is a rapid and dramatic loss of muscle mass
US population has HDL Cholesterol values <35mg per below the level of the lesion.69 In individuals who were only
100ml, whereas about 24—40% of those with Chronic SCI 6weel<s after SCI, average muscle cross-sectional areas (CSAs)
have levels below this value for HDL Cholesterol.62'63 were 18—46% lower than in control subjects.69 Prospective
In acute SCI, lipid levels are generally depressed and normal- study of patients up to 24 weeks after SCI revealed further
ize within the first year.64 Consequently, previously men- declines in average gastrocnemius and soleus muscle CSAs of
tioned alterations in vascular function in individuals with SCI 24 and 12%, re5pectively.69'70 Similarly, from 6 weeks to 24
do not seem to be due to elevations in plasma lipids. However, weeks after injury the average decreases in quadriceps,
beyond the first year after injury, individuals with SCI tend to hamstrings and adductor muscle CSAs were 16, 14 and
develop elevated low-densitylipoprotein Cholesterol and total 16%, respectively.71 Results from a recent investigation on
Spinal Cord

"
"7","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
'—JMSCOW
10
... _ i ‘2” E _f 1.
a '- . :‘fl :ﬁ"" ‘- I- _.'-.3 H"" r - {a
e. HIE'F' __ H “I: 5% .1 IL' F."" Ir}:
{'_F J ﬁt“ .‘
“E '1 ' é “1&5: "" . ' ' . 3""-
“;A.-._..:-. a, . _
H h"" _‘. ' --|-I--|.-.- _.' 1- ._ ”I _ . Ia. .
E};}_hu‘&l g“ i. I'
J. i ' . . i F:- - H _.' _. __.. -- :__ '1: -
.' .. 1» -..:. -._,.+ .‘. .4“ .
3.; H .1 o -
EE' -- #3; ‘!};Y— I t. . .‘:’.
“Tu. li:hL ??--J .' 3}"" .
‘ﬁ- 1ﬂ.r* =Tifil I';""'-' .‘I _.
$3 a ""1"" - . -— — *- tr
- "" ..LA ""' - .1 I ES?! - -.'. '-I| 5$.. I
i- ' ..-.' i : H: ' ' '
b -_ 33;, ._.. _i- . - ._ _ 5
.'T' ."" f 5-. _""Er'. $¥‘Ha'ﬁ' "" .-
.t‘ H - ~j' _a ""i 'In _' £11?"" *3- if'- 11-; _
--‘ - "" ""1' --r-' ' ?J-h , ; ""'~. . ""f 4..
1%! .1? . 1-1' ‘- -:.::4. '33:? .'.! _ *""
'. .-.._.--‘*""""'~'-""l'¢ﬂ-‘: ' ' H
- é?! ~- . - e e , L
Figure 3 Left: Electron micrographs of longitudinal sections from muscle fibers of control (a) and Iong-term spastic patient (b). Skeletal
muscles from control subjects were characterized by a highly ordered internal organization. The contractile apparatus was formed by
sarcomeres, delimited by Z lines (black arrows in a) and well aligned with those of adjacent myofibrils. Muscle fibers from Paralyzed patients
showed partially lost precise alignment of sarcomeres of adjacent myofibrils (black arrows in b). Scale bars=1um. 2 Right: Electron
micrographs of longitudinal sections of slow muscle fibers before (c) and after (d) a 17-day spaceflight. Preflight control fiber has wide
myofibrils, whereas myofibrils postflight are thinner, indicating atrophy. Mitochondria- and glycogen-Iike granules are similar in both fibers,
but lipid droplets (white spheres) are more frequent postflight. Postflight there is also partially lost alignment of sarcomeres of adjacent
myofibrils. Scale bar=1.5 um.78 Note similarities between atrophy and loss of sarcomere alignment between individuals with SCI and
astronauts postflight. (Figures reprinted with permission).
muscle atrophy in long-term paraplegics suggest that after fibers. Widrick et (11.79 made similar observations for the
an initial rapid progression, muscle atrophy reaches a steady soleus muscle; following a 17-day flight, type IIa fiber CSAs
state and likely plateaus.72 Furthermore, ultrastructural declined by 26 % compared with a 15 % reduction in the
analysis of biopsies from long-term spastic patients showed CSAs of type 1 fiber. To our knowledge, there are no data that
that the myofibrillar apparatus is in general less ordered than have examined muscle atrophy following spaceﬂight lasting
in normal muscle. The misalignment of the contractile more than 12 months. However, we hypothesize that,
apparatus in paraplegic patients may explain why their similar to SCI, there would be a plateau in atiophy.119
strength and endurance is decreased when compared with Short-term space ﬂight (17 days) was found to reduce specific
normal subjects. Indeed, using functional electrical stimula- tension of soleus muscle fibers.80 Although human data from
tion, it has been shown that there is an increase in muscle Skylab and Mir suggest that leg extensors atrophy and loose
fatigability following SCI.73 Interestingly, it has recently peak force faster than ﬂexors, when flight duration is long
been shown that long-term neuromuscular electrical stimu— enough (>200 days) both groups of muscles show similar
lation training programs can preserve the physiological declines of ~30 % in isokinetic stiength.73'79
properties of the plantar ﬂexor muscles.74 This training Interestingly, in both patients with SCI and astronauts
protocol yielded significant improvements for the trained following spaceﬂight, there seem to be alterations in the
versus untrained limb in torque, torque-time integral, fatigue contractile apparatus (Figure 3), which could also contribute
index, torque rise time and between-twitch fusion. These t0 the impairment in muscle force. The left side in Figure 3
results show the importance of exercise as a countermeasure illustrates electron micrographs of longitudinal sections
in maintaining muscular integrity in individuals with SCI. from muscle fibers of control (Figure 3a) and long-term
There are similar decreases in muscle size and function spastic patient (Figure 3b). Skeletal muscles from control
after exposure to microgravity. LeBlanC et (11.75 showed a 6% subjects were Characterized by a highly ordered contractile
decrease in muscle volume following an 8-day spaceﬂight, apparatus, delimited by Z lines (black arrows in panel a) and
whereas 6 months of spaceﬂight seems to result in a 13—17% well aligned with those of adjacent myofibrils. In contrast,
decrease in muscle mass.76'77 Following an 11-day human muscle fibers from paralyzed patients showed partially lost,
spaceflight, Edgerton et (11.78 observed a significant decline in precise alignment of sarcomeres of adjacent myofibrils (black
the CSAs of fibers from the vastus lateralis muscle, with arrows in panel b).72 The right side of Figure 3 illustrates
decline being greatest in type IIb fibers and least in type I electron micrographs of longitudinal sections of muscle
Spinal Cord

"
"8","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
JMSCOW—'
11
mineral density (BMD) has been noted in the femoral neck
.1, — Bane (27%), midshaft (25%) and distal femur (43%), as compared
1: n ——----- Muscle . . .
5 With controls. Bone mineral loss continues, but to a lesser
g ‘1“ degree, in the pelvis and lower extremities over the next 10
'1"" years, resulting in demineralization of over 50% by 10 years
5 -zu ‘-- . after injury.88 In contrast to lower limbs, arms and trunk
E 1-,, _ show an increase in bone content after the 4-month point,
31 :3"" ""Huh” .- consequently resulting in a net effect of ~ 10—21% total loss
3 ""““--..._1 _ of bone at the 10-year point.89 In individuals with SCI, distal
E 4“ femur and proximal tibia (knee region) are mostly at risk,
3 """"""""I consistent with site-specific decreases in BMD such that
E '50 fractures of the distal femur are referred to as ‘the paraplegic
fracture’.90 Several investigations have reported an incidence
'5"" n 2“ 4|] En El] 1m 12” 1le 150 of up to 34% of lower extremity fractures in patients with
_ SCI.91'92 Low-energy fractures in individuals with SCI have
TII'I'IE {WEE} been reported to occur during events that would not
Figure 4 Timeline of muscle (dotted line) and bone (solid line) normally cause fractures among able-bodied individuals,
atrophy in .50 (Cirdes) and sp7azceflight (trigfgles). Following SCI, such as a transfer from bed to Chair or being turned in bed.90
there '5 raplc7lzatrophy .Of mUSde .and bone. Th's ?“th P'atei‘ié Common fracture sites appear to be those around the knee,
after 1 year. Spaceflight results In slower progreSSIon of muscle . . . . 93 94
and bone76 atrophy, which also likely plateaus. *Estimates based on SUCh as the distal femur or prox1n1al t1b1a. '
reported literature of bone and muscle loss in microgravity. Interestingly, although spaceﬂight also results in bone
atrophy, progression and magnitude of loss differs from SCI.
The solid lines in Figure 4 illustrate differences between SCI
(Circles) and microgravity (triangles) induced bone loss. Note
fibers before (Figure 3c) and after (Figure 3d) a 17-day that SCI results in rapid loss of bone followed by a plateau,
spaceflight. Preﬂight control fiber had wide myofibrils, whereas bone loss from microgravity exposure occurs more
whereas myofibrils postﬂight were thinner, indicating slowly. Skeletal unloading in astronauts can result inaloss of
atrophy. Furthermore, lipid droplets (white spheres) were as much as 1—20/0 per month of BMD,”95 On the Mir year-
more frequent postﬂight, accompanied by partially lOS’t long mission, bone measurements of astronauts showed a
alignment of sarcomeres of adjacent n1yofibrils.78 It is 10% reduction of lumbar vertebrae as compared with
important to note similarities in atrophy and loss Of preflight.76 Consequently, on an approximately 3-year
sarcomere alignment between individuals with SCI and manned mission to Mars, it is anticipated that astronauts
astronauts postﬂight. could have significant BMD loss in select locations. Sites of
Although both SCI and spaceﬂight lead to a decrease in BMD loss are also similar between individuals with SCI and
muscle mass, a fundamental difference is believed to eXist astronauts. Demineralization in spaceflight also predomi-
between disuse and denervation atrophy. Although denerva- nates in long bones of the lower limbs, with maximal bone
tion atrophy results from injury to motor neurons in the loss occurring in calcaneus and hip.96 The main concern
Spinal cord or to the motor nerves in the ventral roots with this significant loss of BMD for astronauts is bone
through which they exit,81 disuse atrophy occurs as a result fracture. With limited medical resources available during a
of loss of muscle activation?2 Although denervation atrophy mission, a fracture could be detrimental to a mission and
occurs solely in individuals with SCI, both SCI and space- even life threatening for the astronaut.
ﬂight result in disuse atrophy. Disuse atrophy is more
pronounced in extensor muscles that normally bear weight,
especially those that cross single joints.70'8’3 The dotted lines Mechanism of bone loss
in Figure 4 illustrate differences in muscle mass between The mechanism responsible for loss of bone mass is yet to be
denervation atr0phy 0f 5C1 (CiICIQS) and disuse atr0phy Of Clarified. After SCI, bone formation markers (osteoblasts)
microgravity (triangles). Denervation atrophy seems to result remain at normal or slightly higher than normal levels.97
in rapid loss of muscle mass followed by a plateau, whereas However, high levels of alkaline phosphatase, which have
muscle loss from disuse atrOphy occurs more SlOle. been reported during the first year after injury in individuals
with SCI may reﬂect high levels of overall bone turnover.98
Bone loss In addition, notable increases in bone resorption markers
Considerable evidence exists showing the association be- (osteoclasts) have been reported to occur as early as 2 weeks,
tween bone loss and both physical inactivity and decreased reaching peak values 2—4 months after SCI onset.91 These
mechanical loading in individuals living with SCI (the reader studies suggest that bone resorption increases after SCI with
is referred to several in depth reviews on the topic).84‘86 only small Changes in bone formation, and that elevated
Brieﬂy, rate of bone loss after SCI is rapid and linear in the resorption may persist beyond the acute stages of injury.
acute stages, establishing a lower steady-state bone mass Bone resorption markers are also reportedly increased
level 1—2 years after the event .87 In individuals with SCI in during and following spaceflight,99'100 whereas bone forma-
less than 1 year following the injury, reduction in bone tion markers may be unchanged or decreased after flight.101
Spinal Cord

"
"9","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
'—JMS<30W
12
Thus, it is not Clear whether the bone loss is associated with Renal stones
reduced bone remodeling or an uncoupling between bone Patients with SCI are more prone to develop Chronic and
formation and resorption in microgravity. Other factors such complicated stone disease over their lifetime, with 7%
as alterations in systemic hormones such as calcitonin, experiencing an episode within 10 years of injuryl08 In this
testosterone and parathyroid hormone have also been patient cohort, unrecognized stone disease can contribute to
suggested to contribute to a decrease in BMD during renal failure, a significant source of morbidity and mortal-
spaceflight}02 ity.109 In a case—control study, Favazza 61‘ 011.109 reported that
patients forming stones were older and were more likely to
have complete injuries than patients known to be stone-free.
Alterations in other systems DeVivo 61‘ 011.110 noted that patients who developed renal
stones were more likel to be older, have neurolo icall
Although much research has been focused on the con- . . y . g y
, , , complete quadriplegia and have a history of bladder stones.
sequences of SCI and n11crograv1ty on cardiovascular and
, Although no known cases of renal stones have been
musculoskeletal health, other systems are also dramatically . . .
, , reported during spaceflight, NASA astronauts have experi-
affected. Neurovestibular and sensory motor function are . . . .
, enced 14 renal stone episodes, including multiple events
severely altered followrng SCI, and changes to these systems . 111 112 . .
, , , , , , experienced by one crewmember. ' There is a growrng
may impair the ability of a crew to leave the space vehicle in b . .
, , , 2 , , , ody of evrdence from NASA and the Russran space program
an emergency s1tuation after landing. Ind1V1duals w1th SCI . . . .
, , showrng that humans exposed to the n11crograv1ty envrron-
and astronauts may also be at a greater risk of developing . .
, , , , , ment of space also have a greater risk for developing renal
renal stones due to immobilization and metabolic altera- 100113 .
, , , stones. ' Should such stones develop on long-duration
trons. Finally, one of the important systen1s affected by . . .. . . . . .
. , , , n11ss1ons, debilitating pain accompanying the stone 1nc1dent
spaceflight and SCI is the regulation of the immune . .
, , , would result in functional loss of the crew member and that
response, which could have profound effects on the ability , . . . .
, , , person s contribution to overall success of the mission. Lack
of the host to res1st infection and tumors. . . . . . .
of facrlities for 1n-fl1ght treatment of a stone episode could
furthermore necessitate aborting the mission and initiating a
Neurovestibular and sensory motor dysfunction rapid return to Earth.
For the motor system to function effectively, a continuous Although stone formation in low urinary tract is poorly
inﬂow of sensoryinforn1ation is necessary to allow the body understood, there is some evidence implicating the role of
to select appropriate responses and to make adjustments in hypercalciuria in this process. With an increased breakdown
ongoing movements. Vision, hearing and receptors on the of BMD, spaceﬂight and SCI result in chronic changes in
body surface inform the motor systen1s about events in the calcium balanceul'112 Decreased ﬂuid intake and decreased
environment. Proprioceptors in muscles, joints and vestib- urine volume, both commonly observed following SCI and
ular apparatus inform about position and orientation of the spaceflight, may increase the risk for renal stones.1M
body and limbs, and degree of contraction of the muscles. In Consequently, proper hydration is an important counter-
SCI, communication between supraspinal centers and mus- measure to prevent renal stone formation.
cles below the level of the lesion is often completely
absent.103 In other words, command inputs from the brain
do not reach the muscles. As the motor systems do not have Immune dysfunction
proprioceptive information available to them, losses occur Alterations in immune system have been shown to occur
not only in motor functions but also in sensory ones. along with other physiological changes associated with
Consequently, Visual cues become much more significant spaceflight and SCLHS'”6 Individuals with SCI have de-
following SCI. creased natural and adaptive immune function and reduced
Spaceﬂight n1ay negatively affect neurovestibular and blood levels of cellular adhesion molecules that participate
sensorimotor functions, particularly posture and locomotor in immune function and wound healing.117'l18 SCI might
control, gaze stabilization and spatial orientation.104'105 affect immune cells and immune responsiveness by (1)
Disturbances in neurovestibular and sensorimotor functions disrupting the outflow of signals from the sympathetic
can result in degraded performance of operational tasks on nervous system to lymphoid tissues and their blood vessels,
orbit, inability to perform emergency egress, and impair- as well as returning afferent signals from these tissues to the
ments in performing normal daily activities for varying brain; (2)in1n1unosuppression caused by stressors affecting
periods after landing. Absence of gravitational stimulation of patients with SCI; (3) interrupting returning signals to the
the otolith organ seems to be heaVily implicated in the centralnervous system from the periphery, thereby reducing
observed neurovestibular effects. This is thought to con- facilitation of in1n1unoregulatory central nervous system
tribute to sensory conﬂict and may interfere with central neurons and decreasing their activity; or a combination of all
processing tasks associated with Visuomotor skills. Over three.115'1l6
time, similar to SCI, the central nervous system is apparently Altered white blood cell subpopulations, decreased pro-
able to adapt by reweighting sensory inputs—relying more liferation of immune cells and altered production of
heavily on Visual cues than proprioceptive and otolithic in1n1unoregulatory molecules have also been documented
inputs. However, this adaptation is not complete, as is during andin1n1ediately after spaceflight.120 The mechan-
shown by the deficits observed.104‘107 isn1s and biomedical consequences of these changes ren1ain
Spinal Cord

"
"10","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
b
13
250
*
* *
=0.04 ""
80 p- 160 $5“. * 2} 3
70 L-: :l SCI '- 5; "" * :I ” 1%:
a: 60 :-: p=0 03 -Control ' iﬁ ---._-: 5 y Ei- E??-
g c 3 ' .j E, m: ﬁfa :<-:-: ‘ UE- 3:31: 55:3
3 .2 50 ::: 5.. 70 g % “ﬂ. #3: $4 :1:
.: Ila III 1* Q) t . r. . ::1""' ..
g— 40 { 2 c» ~ ::, -: r . . :
§§30 E 55‘ E5 c.o$§§1q%ai§:% _
gem g g‘hM4g tﬁﬁwﬂﬂﬂmﬂﬂ
10 E' I: 5’5 L :-: o '20 PE '3’
0 1:: E 1:: t: :l: 3'53; jg:
0’89 0‘83 0°23 00:83 $363 3% 3%
x ‘a';:‘ :-'H5;._
\0 \99 «35’ 0°} 68’ -110 E: 9:53;
\\9 a 00 0 G 2&1;
0% « 0 &\ ’ (.0K \9 13-13%
Q: ‘5 ~P e) *
éQ x0 o
as“ 49 94’
4° -2oo
Neu Lym Mon Eos CD4 CD8CD19 NK NE Epi
Cells Type
Figure 5 Left: Percent cell types of the total lymphocyte population in SCI (open bar) and controls (hatched bars) (mean is.e.).115 Right:
Percentage change in number of circulating leukocytes and levels of catecholamines among 11 astronauts after landing (R_0) as compared
with preflight (L_10) values.120 *P< 0.05 versus preflight. Note the similarities in the increase in lymphocyte population and the decrease in
natural killer cell population between individuals with SCI and astronauts postflight. (Figures reprinted with permission).
to be established, although possible causes of spaceflight- the groups is trauma to the spinal cord and associated
induced alterations in immune responses include exposure dysfunctions present in individuals with SCI. For example,
to stress and exposure to radiation. loss of motor control by supraspinal structures results in
Figure 5 illustrates these alterations in immune function paralysis and inability of an individual to stand up or
following SCI and spaceﬂight. The left graph presents a exercise. This is Clearly not the case in astronauts, who have
significant difference between preflight and postﬂight in an intact central nervous system. Alack of supraspinalinput
percent cell types of the total lymphocyte population in SCI to spinal autonomic control is another physiological differ-
(open bars) and controls (hatched bars),115 whereas the right ence. Although both groups experience orthostatic intoler-
graph shows a significant percentage Change in the number ance, there is a decline in resting muscle sympathetic activity
of Circulating leukocytes among 11 astronauts after landing in individuals with SCI, and an increase in muscle sympa-
(R_O) as compared with preflight (L_lO) values.120 Note the thetic nerve activity in microgravity. Another consideration
similarities in the increase in lymphocyte population and is the fact that Changes observed in astronauts after long
the decrease in natural killer cells population between exposure to microgravity are largely reversible, which is
individuals with SCI and astronauts postflight. often not the case for individuals with SCI. In summary,
Overall, these data suggest that a dysregulation of the discrepancies in study design, magnitude of Change and lack
immune system occurs in SCI and spaceﬂight, and that these of information with regard to long-term adaptations in SCI
Changes may increase the risks of infection, increase the and spaceflight limit comparisons. These distinctions are
reactivation of latent Viruses, and potentially alter immune important to take into account when designing and
surveillance and the incidence of autoimmune disease or implementing countermeasures for both SCI and spaceﬂight.
tumorigenesis. As the space program moves to longer
exploratory missions, importance of the observed immune
system Changes w111 increase dramatically. C 0 n Clu Si 0 n
There are striking similarities between cardiovascular, mus-
. . .. lkll hr mlrinh rfll-
MicrograVIty and SCI: sumllar but not the same ,Cu 05 e Eta and 0t 6 SYSEQ a te,at O S t at occu O OW
111g SCI and exposure to m1crograv1ty (Table 1). Both SCI and
Although we presented various similarities in health and spaceﬂight result in decreased baroreceptor function and
physiological outcomes among individuals with SCI and alterations in salt and water balance, two mechanisms
astronauts, there are also significant differences between the contributing to orthostatic intolerance. However, following
two conditions that must be considered. Individuals with SCI the loss of central tonic sympathetic control is also a
SCI cannot stand up because of paralysis, and have only major factor contributing to orthostatic intolerance. De-
limited gravity exposure when seated in a wheelchair, creased BMD is due to an increase in osteoclast function in
whereas astronauts are continuously exposed to micrograv— both conditions. Spaceflight results in disuse muscle atro-
ity during spaceﬂight. Accordingly, it is difficult to separate phy, whereas SCI causes muscle atrophy through both
hypokinesis effects from those associated with reduced denervation and disuse mechanisms. Finally, spaceﬂight
gravitational stress. The most crucial difference between and SCI lead to decreases in immune function, an increased
Spinal Cord

"
"11","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
' JM Scott et al
14
risk of renal stone formation, and alterations in neuroves- 9 Buckey Jr JC, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE, Wright S],
tibular and sensory motor systems. These similarities M0016 WE ‘1 ‘11- QrthOStatiC int01erance after Spaceﬂight / APP]
occurring in two discrete populations may result in an Phy 5101 1996; 81: 748‘
. . . . . . 10 Hargens AR, Richardson S. Cardiovascular adaptations, fluid
1ncreasmg number 0f C11n1C1ans Choosmg to use research shifts, and countermeasures related to space ﬂight. RespirPhysiol
facilities aboard the international space station to better Neurobiol 2009; 169(Supp1 1): 830—833.
understand the ways of preventing some of the negative 11 Wallifl 13G, Stjemberg L-Sympathetic aCtiVi’Eyin mar} after Spinal
physiological consequences of SCI. So too, life scientists may Elia 131u1r5301ggﬂ0w t0 5km bEIOW the leSIOn‘ Bram 1984’ 107
100k t0 Earth-based models to explore the consequences Of 12 Teasell RW, Arnold JM, Krassioukov A, Delaney GA. Cardiovas-
microgravity. Investigations may be limited by availability Of cular consequences of loss of supraspinal control of the
data from astronauts and animals ﬂown in space, as well as 327121;?2195121833’03 S?E??lifter Spinal cord iniUIY- ArCh PhyS
. . . . . . . e e a 1 ; ; _ .
the difflcultles 1n perfOtmlng long-term bed IQSt 1nvest1ga- 13 Mathias C], Christensen NJ, Frankel HL, Peart WS. Renin release
t1ons 1n humans. In the mterim, ground-based models based during head-up tilt occurs independently of sympathetic
0n SCI may be used for investigations examining the nervous activity in tetraplegic man. Clin Sci (Lond) 1980; 59:
physiological mechanisms underlying disuse. Conversely, 251-256- . .
as space exploration becomes more frequent, opportunities 14 Egagsv‘l’grtgzggesart rate and orthOStatlc Stress' Ch"" Auto"" R65
to explore phys1010g1ca1 Changes assoc1ated Wlth spaceﬂlght 15 Leach CS, Altchuler SI, Cintron-Trevino NM. The endocrine and
will expand and may replace other models in evaluation of metabolic responses to space flight. Med SciSportsExerc 1983; 15:
the effect of reduced gravitational forces. 432—440.
16 Leach CS, Alfrey CP, Suki WN, Leonard J1, Rambaut PC, Inners
LD et (11. Regulation of body ﬂuid compartments during short-
. . term 5 aceﬂi ht. [A lPh siol 1996; 81: 105—116.
conﬂ'Ct 0f 'ntereSt 17 Norsk pP, Drﬁmmerpg, Récker L, Strollo F, Christensen NJ,
. . Warber J et (11. Renal and endocrine res onses in humans to
The authors declare no conﬂlct Of 1nterest. isotonif saline infusion during microgravify. [Appl Physiol 1995;
78: 2253—2259.
18 Eckberg DL. Bursting into space: alterations of sympathetic
Acknowledgements control by space travel. Acta Physiol Scand 2003; 177: 299—311.
19 Lathers CM, Charles JB, Schneider VS, Frey MA, Fortney S. Use of
Dr Warburton is supported by a career award from the lower body negative pressure to assess changes in heart rate
Canadian Institutes of Health Research and is a Michael f(SjIID-OHIEZ t0 ort?i’;§:icéﬁke5Egressgodurmg 17 weeks Of bed reSt'
, , , m armaco ; : — .
Smlth Foundatlon for Health Research (MSFHR) Cllnlcal 20 Fritsch-Yelle JM, Charles JB, Jones MM, Wood ML. Microgravity
Scholar. DI KIaSSiOUkOV iS SUppOItEd by International decreases heart rate and arterial pressure in humans. ] Appl
Collaboration 0n Repair Discoveries, the Heart and Stroke PhJ/Siol 1996; 80: 910-914.
Foundation and Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation. 21 Blaber AP, Bondar RL, Kassam MS. Heart rate variability and
. ' . short duration spaceflight: relationship to post-ﬂight orthostatic
Jess1ca Scott was supported by doctoral graduate scholarshlps intolerance. BMC Physi 01 2004; 4: 6.
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council 22 Crandall CG, Engelke KA, Pawelczyk JA, Raven p13, Converting
of Canada and the MSFHR. VA. Power spectral and time based analysis of heart rate
variability following 15 days head-down bed rest. Aviat Space
Environ Med 1994; 65: 1105—1109.
R ef er en C e S 23 Hughson RL, Maillet A, Gharib C, Fortrat JO, Yamamoto Y, Pavy-
Letraon A et (11. Reduced spontaneous baroreﬂex response slope
1 Krassioukov A, Claydon VE. The Clinical problems in cardio- during lower bOdY negative pressure after 28 days Of head-down
vascular control following spinal cord injury: an overview. bedrest.]ApplPhysiol1994; 77169-77-
pmg Brain Res 2006; 152; 223_229. 24 Munakata M, Kameyama J, Nunokawa T, Ito N, Yoshinaga K.
2 Williams D, Kuipers A, Mukai C, Thirsk R. Acclimation during Altered Mayer wave and baroreﬂex profiles in high spinal cord
space ﬂight: effects on human physiology. CMA] 2009; 180: injury. Am] Hypertens 2001; 141 141-148-
1317_1 323. 25 Convertino VA, Adams WC, Shea JD, Thompson CA, Hofﬂer GW.
3 Dietz V, Colombo G Recovery from spinal cord injury_under_ Impairment Of carotid-Cardiac vagal baroreﬂex in wheelchair-
1ying mechanisms and efficacy of rehabilitation. Acta Neurochir dependent quadriplegics. Am ] Physiol 1991; 260: R576-R580-
Suppl 2004; 89: 95400, 26 Wecht JM, De Meersman RE, Weir JP, Spungen AM, Bauman WA.
4 Meek JV, Reyes C], Perez SA, Goldberger AL, Ziegler MG. Marked Cardiac autonomic responses to progressive head-up tilt in
exacerbation of orthostatic intolerance after long- vs short- individuals With paraplegia. Clin Auton R65 2003; 131 433-438-
duration spaceﬂight in veteran astronauts. Psychosom Med 2001; 27 Aslan SC, Randall DC; 13011011119 KD, Knapp CF; Patwardhan AR,
63: 865—873. McDowell SM et al. Blood pressure regulation in neurally intact
5 C1ayd0nVE,SteevesJD,KrassioukovA.Orthostatic hypotension human vs acutely injured paraplegic and tetraplegic patients
following spinal cord injury: understanding clinical pathophy- during passive tilt. Am ] Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007;
siology. Spinal Card 2006; 44: 341—351. 292: R1146—R1157.
6 The Consensus Committee of the American Autonomic Society 28 FritSCh JM, Charles JB, Bennett BS, Jones MM, Eckberg DL. Short-
and the American Academy of Neurology. Consensus statement duration spaceflight impairs human carotid baroreceptor-cardi-
on the definition of orthostatic hypotension, pure autonomic ac reflex responses. ] Appl Physiol 1992; 73: 664—671.
failure, and multiple system atrophy. Neurology 1996; 46: 1470. 29 Fritsch-Yelle JM, Charles JB, Jones MM, Beightol LA, Eckberg DL.
7 Mathias C], Mallipeddi R, Bleasdale-Barr K. Symptoms associated Spaceflight alters autonomic regulation of arterial pressure in
with orthostatic hypotension in pure autonomic failure and humans. ] Appl Physiol 1994; 77: 1776—1783.
multiple system atrophy. ] Neurol 1999; 246: 893—898. 30 Cox JF, Tahvanainen KU, Kuusela TA, Levine BD, Cooke WH,
8 Illman A, Stiller K, Williams M. The prevalence of orthostatic Mano T et al. Inﬂuence of microgravity on astronauts’
hypotension during physiotherapy treatment in patients with sympathetic and vagal responses to Valsalva’s manoeuvre.
an acute spinal cord injury. Spinal Card 2000; 38: 741—747. ] Physiol 2002; 538: 309—320.
Spinal Cord

"
"12","Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity w
JM Scott et al '
15

31 Claydon VE, Norcliffe L], Moore JP, Rivera-Ch M, Leon-Velarde F, human coronary and peripheral circulations. ] Am Coll Cardiol
Appenzeller O et al. Orthostatic tolerance and blood volumes in 1995; 26: 1235—1241.

Andean high altitude dwellers. Exp Physiol 2004; 89: 565—571. 55 Schroeder S, Enderle MD, Ossen R, Meisner C, Baumbach A,

32 Claydon VE, Hainsworth R. Salt supplementation improves Pfohl M et al. Noninvasive determination of endothelium-
orthostatic cerebral and peripheral vascular control in patients mediated vasodilation as a screening test for coronary artery
with syncope. Hypertension 2004; 43: 809—813. disease: pilot study to assess the predictive value in comparison

33 Karlsson AK, Krassioukov AV. Hyponatremia-induced transient with angina pectoris, exercise electrocardiography, and myo-
Visual disturbances in acute spinal cord injury. Spinal Card 2004; cardial perfusion imaging. Am Heart I 1999; 138: 731—739.

42: 204—207. 56 De Groot PC, Van Kuppevelt DH, Pons C, Snoek G, Van Der

34 Houtman S, Oeseburg B, Hopman MT. Blood volume and Woude LH, Hopman MT. Time course of arterial vascular
hemoglobin after spinal cord injury. Am ] Phys Med Rehabil adaptations to inactivity and paralyses in humans. Med Sci
2000; 79: 260—265. Sports Exerc 2003; 35: 1977—1985.

35 Groomes TE, Huang CT. Orthostatic hypotension after spinal 57 Grey E, Bratteli C, Glasser SP, Alinder C, Finkelstein SM,
cord injury: treatment with ﬂudrocortisone and ergotamine. Lindgren BR et (11. Reduced small artery but not large artery
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1991; 72: 56—58. elasticity is an independent risk marker for cardiovascular

36 Diedrich A, Paranjape SY, Robertson D. Plasma and blood events.Am [Hypertens 2003; 16: 265—269.
volume in space. Am ] Med Sci 2007; 334: 80—85. 58 Hesse C, Siedler H, Luntz SP, Arendt BM, Goerlich R, Fricker R

37 de Groot PC, van Dijk A, Dijk E, Hopman MT. Preserved cardiac et al. Modulation of endothelial and smooth muscle function by
function after chronic spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil bed rest and hypoenergetic, low-fat nutrition. ] Appl Physiol
2006; 87: 1195—1200. 2005; 99: 2196—2203.

38 Nash MS, Bilsker S, Marcillo AE, Isaac SM, Botelho LA, Klose K] 59 Coupe M, Fortrat JO, Larina I, Gauquelin-Koch G, Gharib C,
et al. Reversal of adaptive left ventricular atrophy following Custaud MA. Cardiovascular deconditioning: from autonomic
electrically-stimulated exercise training in human tetraplegics. nervous system to microvascular dysfunctions. Respir Physiol
Paraplegia 1991; 29: 590—599. Neurobiol 2009; 169(Supp1 1): 810—812.

39 Perhonen MA, Franco F, Lane LD, Buckey JC, Blomqvist CG, 60 Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, And Treatment of High
Zerwekh JE et (11. Cardiac atrophy after bed rest and spaceflight. Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).
] Appl Physiol 2001; 91: 645—653. Executive Summary of The Third Report of The National

40 Levine BD, Zuckerman JH, Pawelczyk JA. Cardiac atrophy after Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP). [AMA 2001; 285:
bed-rest deconditioning: a nonneural mechanism for orthostatic 2486—2497.
intolerance. Circulation 1997; 96: 517—525. 61 Manns P], McCubbin JA, Williams DP. Fitness, inﬂammation,

41 Lehmann KG, Lane JG, Piepmeier JM, Batsford WP. Cardio- and the metabolic syndrome in men with paraplegia. Arch Phys
vascular abnormalities accompanying acute spinal cord injury Med Rehabil 2005; 86: 1176—1181.
in humans: incidence, time course and severity. [Am Coll Cardiol 62 Brenes G, Dearwater S, Shapera R, LaPorte RE, Collins E. High
1987; 10: 46—52. density lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations in physically

42 Winslow EB, Lesch M, Talano JV, Meyer Jr PR. Spinal cord active and sedentary spinal cord injured patients. Arch Phys
injuries associated with cardiopulmonary complications. Spine Med Rehabil 1986; 67: 445—450.

(Phila Pa 1976) 1986; 11: 809—812. 63 Bauman WA, Adkins RH, Spungen AM, Herbert R, Schechter C,

43 Furlan JC, Fehlings MG, Shannon P, Norenberg MD, Smith D et al. Is immobilization associated with an abnormal
Krassioukov AV. Descending vasomotor pathways in humans: lipoprotein profile? Observations from a diverse cohort. Spinal
correlation between axonal preservation and cardiovascular Card 1999; 37: 485—493.
dysfunction after spinal cord injury. ] Neurotrauma 2003; 20: 64 Apstein MD, George BC. Serum lipids during the first year
1351—1363. following acute spinal cord injury. Metabolism 1998; 47: 367—370.

44 Furlan JC, Krassioukov AV, Fehlings MG. The effects of gender 65 Cardus D, Ribas-Cardus F, McTaggart WG. Lipid profiles in spinal
on Clinical and neurological outcomes after acute cervical spinal cord injury. Paraplegia 1992; 30: 775—782.
cord injury. ] Neurotrauma 2005; 22: 368—381. 66 Bauman WA, Spungen AM. Metabolic Changes in persons after

45 Collins HL, Rodenbaugh DW, DiCarlo SE. Spinal cord injury spinal cord injury. Phys Med Rehabil ClinNAm 2000; 11: 109—140.
alters cardiac electrophysiology and increases the susceptibility 67 Leach CS, Lane HW, Krauhs JM. Short-term space ﬂight on
to ventricular arrhythmias. Prog Brain Res 2006; 152: 275—288. nitrogenous compounds, lipoproteins, and serum proteins.

46 Claydon VE, Elliott SL, Sheel AW, Krassioukov A. Cardiovascular ] Clin Pharmacol 1994; 34: 500—509.
responses to Vibrostimulation for sperm retrieval in men with 68 Markin A, Strogonova L, Balashov O, Polyakov V, Tigner T. The
spinal cord injury. ] Spinal Cord Med 2006; 29: 207—216. dynamics of blood biochemical parameters in cosmonauts during

47 Fritsch-Yelle JM, Leuenberger UA, D’Aunno DS, Rossum AC, Brown long-term space ﬂights. Acta Astronaut 1998; 42: 247—253.

TE, Wood ML et al. An episode of ventricular tachycardia during 69 Castro M], Apple Jr DF, Hillegass EA, Dudley GA. Influence of
long-duration spaceﬂight. Am ] Cardiol 1998; 81: 1391—1392. complete spinal cord injury on skeletal muscle cross-sectional

48 D’Aunno DS, Dougherty AH, DeBlock HF, Meek JV. Effect of area within the first 6 months of injury. Eur ] Appl Physiol Occup
short- and long-duration spaceflight on QTC intervals in healthy Physiol 1999; 80: 373—3 78.
astronauts. Am ] Cardiol 2003; 91: 494—497. 70 Wilmet E, Ismail AA, Heilporn A, Welraeds D, Bergmann P.

49 Convertino VA. Status of cardiovascular issues related to space Longitudinal study of the bone mineral content and of soft tissue
ﬂight: implications for future research directions. Respir Physiol composition after spinal cord section. Paraplegia 1995; 33: 674—677.
Neurobiol 2009; 169(Supp1 1): 534—837. 71 Spungen AM, Wang J, Pierson Jr RN, Bauman WA. Soft tissue

50 Folkow B. Structure and function of the arteries in hypertension. body composition differences in monozygotic twins discordant
Am Heart] 1987; 114: 938—948. for spinal cord injury. [Appl Physiol 2000; 88: 1310—1315.

51 Vane JR, Anggard EE, Botting RM. Regulatory functions of the 72 Kern H, Hofer C, Modlin M, Mayr W, Vindigni V, Zampieri S
vascular endothelium. N Engl ] Med 1990; 323: 27—36. et (11. Stable muscle atrophy in long-term paraplegics with

52 Celermajer DS, Sorensen KE, Gooch VM, Spiegelhalter D], Miller complete upper motor neuron lesion from 3- to 20-year SCI.
01, Sullivan ID et al. Non-invasive detection of endothelial Spinal Card 2008; 46: 293—304.
dysfunction in Children and adults at risk of atherosclerosis. 73 Fitts RH, Riley DR, Widrick J]. Functional and structural
Lancet 1992; 340: 1111—1115. adaptations of skeletal muscle to microgravity. ] Exp Biol 2001;

53 Furchgott RF, Zawadzki JV. The obligatory role of endothelial 204: 3201—3208.
cells in the relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by acetylcho- 74 Shields RK, Dudley-Javoroski S. Musculoskeletal adaptations
line. Nature 1980; 288: 373—376. in Chronic spinal cord injury: effects of long-term soleus

54 Anderson TJ, Uehata A, Gerhard MD, Meredith IT, Knab S, electrical stimulation training. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2007;
Delagrange D et (11. Close relation of endothelial function in the 21: 169—179.

Spinal Cord

"
"13","w Physiological consequences of SCI and microgravity
' JM Scott et al
16

75 LeBlanc A, Rowe R, Schneider V, Evans H, Hedrick T. Regional energy X-ray absorptiometry for early determination of bone
muscle loss after short duration spaceﬂight. Aviat Space Environ 1055 in persons with spinal cord injury. Metabolism 2002; 51:
Med 1995; 66: 1151—1154. 958—963.

76 LeBlanc A, Schneider V, Shackelford L, West S, Oganov V, 99 Collet P, Uebelhart D, Vico L, Moro L, Hartmann D, Roth M et al.
Bakulin A et al. Bone mineral and lean tissue loss after long Effects of 1- and 6-month spaceﬂight on bone mass and
duration space ﬂight. ] Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2000; 1: biochemistry in two humans. Bone 1997; 20: 547—551.
157—160. 100 Heer M, Kamps N, Biener C, Korr C, Boerger A, Zittermann A

77 Trappe S, Costill D, Gallagher P, Creer A, Peters JR, Evans H et al. et (11. Calcium metabolism in microgravity. Eur ] Med Res 1999; 4:
Exercise in space: human skeletal muscle after 6 months aboard the 35 7—3 60.

International Space Station. ] Appl Physiol 2009; 106: 1159—1168. 101 Rucci N, Migliaccio S, Zani BM, Taranta A, Teti A. Characteriza-

78 Edgerton VR, Zhou MY, Ohira Y, Klitgaard H, Jiang B, Bell G et (11. tion of the osteoblast-like cell phenotype under microgravity
Human fiber size and enzymatic properties after 5 and 1 1 days of conditions in the NASA-approved rotating wall vessel bioreactor
spaceflight. [Appl Physiol 1995; 78: 1733—1739. (RWV). ] Cell Biochem 2002; 85: 167—179.

79 Widrick J], Knuth ST, Norenberg KM, Romatowski JG, Bain JL, 102 Uebelhart D, Demiaux-Domenech B, Roth M, Chantraine A.
Riley DA et al. Effect of a 17 day spaceflight on contractile Bone metabolism in spinal cord injured individuals and in
properties of human soleus muscle fibres. ] Physiol 1999; 516 others who have prolonged immobilisation. A review. Paraplegia
(Part 3): 915—930. 1995; 33: 669—673.

80 Greenleaf JE, Bernauer EM, Ertl AC, Trowbridge TS, Wade CE. 103 Ivanenko YP, Poppele RE, Lacquaniti F. Distributed neural
Work capacity during 30 days of bed rest with isotonic and networks for controlling human locomotion: lessons from
isokinetic exercise training. ] Appl Physiol 1989; 67: 1820—1826. normal and SCI subjects. Brain Res Bull 2009; 78: 13—21.

81 Roy RR, Baldwin KM, Edgerton VR. The plasticity of skeletal 104 Bacal K, Billica R, Bishop S. Neurovestibular symptoms follow-
muscle: effects of neuromuscular activity. Exerc Sport Sci Rev ing space ﬂight. ] Vestib Res 2003; 13: 93—102.

1991; 19: 269—312. 105 Clement G, Reschke M, Wood S. Neurovestibular and sensor-

82 Gordon T, Mao J. Muscle atrophy and procedures for training imotor studies in space and Earth benefits. Curr Pharm Biotechnol
after spinal cord injury. Phys Ther 1994; 74: 50—60. 2005; 6: 267—283.

83 Negredo P, Rivero JL, Gonzalez B, Ramon-Cueto A, Manso R. 106 Holstein GR, Kukielka E, Martinelli GP. Anatomical observations
Slow- and fast-twitch rat hind limb skeletal muscle phenotypes 8 of the rat cerebellar modulus after 24h of spaceﬂight. ] Gravit
months after spinal cord transection and olfactory ensheathing Physiol 1999; 6: P47—P50.
glia transplantation. ] Physiol 2008; 586: 2593—2610. 107 Parker DE, Reschke MF, Arrott AP, Homick JL, Lichtenberg BK.

84 Giangregorio L, McCartney N. Bone 1055 and muscle atrophy in Otolith tilt-translation reinterpretation following prolonged
spinal cord injury: epidemiology, fracture prediction, and weightlessness: implications for preﬂight training. Aviat Space
rehabilitation strategies. ] Spinal Cord Med 2006; 29: 489—500. Environ Med 1985; 56: 601—606.

85 Dudley—Javoroski S, Shields RK. Muscle and bone plasticity after 108 Ost MC, Lee BR. Urolithiasis in patients with spinal cord
spinal cord injury: review of adaptations to disuse and to electrical injuries: risk factors, management, and outcomes. Curr Opin Urol
muscle stimulation. ] Rehabil Res Dev 2008; 45: 283—296. 2006; 16: 93—99.

86 Maimoun L, Fattal C, Micallef JP, Peruchon E, Rabischong P. 109 Favazza T, Midha M, Martin J, Grob BM. Factors inﬂuencing
Bone 1055 in spinal cord-injured patients: from physiopathology bladder stone formation in patients with spinal cord injury.
to therapy. Spinal Card 2006; 44: 203—210. ] Spinal Cord Med 2004; 27: 252—254.

87 Garland DE, Stewart CA, Adkins RH, Hu SS, Rosen C, Liotta F] 110 DeVivo M], Fine PR, Cutter GR, Maetz HM. The risk of
et al. Osteoporosis after spinal cord injury. ] Orthop Res 1992; 10: renal calculi in spinal cord injury patients. ] Urol 1984; 131:
371—378. 857—860.

88 Reiter AL, Volk A, Vollmar J, Fromm B, Gerner H]. Changes of 111 Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Morukov BV, Sams CF. The risk of renal
basic bone turnover parameters in short-term and long-term stone formation during and after long duration space flight.
patients with spinal cord injury. Eur Spine ] 2007; 16: 771—776. Nephron 2001; 89: 264—270.

89 Lang T, LeBlanc A, Evans H, Lu Y, Genant H, Yu A. Cortical and 112 Whitson PA, Pietrzyk RA, Sams CF. Urine volume and its effects
trabecular bone mineral loss from the spine and hip in long- on renal stone risk in astronauts. Aviat Space Environ Med 2001 ;
duration spaceﬂight. ] Bone Miner Res 2004; 19: 1006—1012. 72: 368—372.

90 Comarr AE, Hutchinson RH, Bors E. Extremity fractures of 113 Smith SM, Wastney ME, Morukov BV, Larina 1M, Nyquist LE,
patients with spinal cord injuries. Am ] Surg 1962; 103: 732—739. Abrams SA et (11. Calcium metabolism before, during, and after a

91 Vestergaard P, Krogh K, Rejnmark L, Mosekilde L. Fracture rates 3-m0 spaceﬂight: kinetic and biochemical changes. Am ] Physiol
and risk factors for fractures in patients with spinal cord injury. 1999; 277: R1—R10.

Spinal Card 1998; 36: 790—796. 114 Viroslav J, Rosenblatt R, Tomazevic SM. Respiratory manage-

92 Freehafer AA, HazelCM, Becker CL. Lower extremity fractures in ment, survival, and quality of life for high-level traumatic
patients with spinal cord injury. Paraplegia 1981; 19: 367—3 72. tetraplegics. Respir Care Clin N Am 1996; 2: 313—322.

93 de Bruin ED, Dietz V, Dambacher MA, Stussi E. Longitudinal 115 Campagnolo DI, Dixon D, Schwartz J, Bartlett JA, Keller SE.
changes in bone in men with spinal cord injury. Clin Rehabil Altered innate immunity following spinal cord injury. Spinal
2000; 14: 145—152. Card 2008; 46: 477—481.

94 Eser P, Frotzler A, Zehnder Y, Denoth]. Fracture threshold in the 116 Cruse JM, Keith JC, Bryant Jr ML, Lewis Jr RE. Immune system-
femur and tibia of people with spinal cord injury as determined neuroendocrine dysregulation in spinal cord injury. Immunol
by peripheral quantitative computed tomography. Arch Phys Res 1996; 15: 306—314.

Med Rehabil 2005; 86: 498—504. 117 Edgerton VR, Kim S], Ichiyama RM, Gerasimenko YP, Roy RR.

95 Biering-Sorensen F, Bohr HH, Schaadt OP. Longitudinal study of Rehabilitative therapies after spinal cord injury. ] Neurotrauma
bone mineral content in the lumbar spine, the forearm and the 2006; 23: 560—5 70.
lower extremities after spinal cord injury. Eur ] Clin Invest 1990; 118 de Castro MC, Cliquet Jr A. Artificial sensorimotor integration
20: 330—335. in spinal cord injured subjects through neuromuscular and

96 Grigoriev AI, Bugrov SA, Bogomolov VV, Egorov AD, Kozlovs- electrotactile stimulation. Artif Organs 2000; 24: 710—717.
kaya 1B, Pestov ID et (11. Preliminary medical results of the Mir 119 Fitts RH, Riley DR, Widrick J]. Physiology of a microgravity
year-long mission. Acta Astronaut 1991 ; 23: 1—8. environment invited review: microgravity and skeletal muscle. ]

97 Bergmann P, Heilporn A, Schoutens A, Paternot J, Tricot A. ApplPhySi012000; 89: 823—839.

Longitudinal study of calcium and bone metabolism in para- 120 Mills P], Meek JV, Waters WW, D’Aunno D, Ziegler MG.
plegic patients. Paraplegia 1977; 15: 147—159. Peripheral leukocyte subpopulations and catecholamine levels

98 Maimoun L, Couret I, Micallef JP, Peruchon E, Mariano-Goulart in astronauts as a function of mission duration. Psychosom Med
D, Rossi M et (11. Use of bone biochemical markers with dual- 2001; 63: 886—890.

Spinal Cord

"
