"","x"
"1","Developmental Biology 228, 1—5 (2000) . ®
doi :10.1006/dbio.2000.9907, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on I I] EP‘I-
D evelopm ental Biology Research In Space:
Issues and D I rections In the Era of the
International Space Station
Notes from the Septem ber 1999 M eeting of the
International Space Life Sciences Working G roup
in Woods Hole, M assachusetts
Sally A. M oody* and C atherine G olden’r
*Department of A natomy and C ell Biology, The George Washington University M edica/ C enter,
2300 I (Eye) Street, N W, Washington, DC 20037; and TFundamenta/ Biology Program, Ames
Research C enter, National Aeronautics and SbaceAdministration, M offett Field, C alifornia 94035
IN T R0 D U C T 10 N of these difﬁculties. T he ﬁ rst elements of the International
Space Station (155) have been launched and full research
. capabi | ity ofthe ISSis expected withi n the decade. It wi ll be
Over the past decade, several adVIsory panels have . . . .
evaluated space biology research to guide future research equnpped W'th hardware to eupport several _c||fferent kinds
endeavors (Space Studies Board N ational Research Coun- Of developing animalsandwnll Include centrifuges that WI“
cil, 1987, 1991, 1998). Four majer goals were enunciated in provide a 1g eontro-I envtronment and have a fractional
the 1987 report that are sti || perti nent: (a) to descri be and gravnty capabiilty to Investigate graVIty thresho!cis and close
understand human adaptation to the space environment, responses. It IS expected that. the ISS wtll facnlitate well—
(b) to use that knowledge to improve the health and designed,weII-eontrolledstudiesthat fulﬁll the recommen—
safety of astronauts, (c) to understand the rol e that gravity dations of preVIeus reVIew panels and beef Interest to the
plays in biological processes of plants and animals, and developmental biology researeh community. _
(CI) to determine if any biological phenomenon that arises TO fOCtJS developmental b'_°|09y research efforts Wh'le
in an organism is better studied in space than on Earth. It the ISS '5 being bu'ltr _an Internatlbnal workshop was
was considered particularly important to determine convened by the International Space Life Scnences Working
whether the space environment would interfere with hu— Group-(ISLSWG), Wh'Ch was formed 'n 1991 to develop a
man and/or animal reproduction and whether there are strategic plan to_strength_en space research and to enhance
developmental phenomena that can be better studied in knowledge and Information exchange. Prevnous ISLSWG
microgravity than on Earth. To begin addressing these workshops addressed issues in cardiovascular, muscle,
issues, the 1991 evaluation recommended that animals be plant, bone, radiation, neuroscience, and cell and molecular
maintained through two complete life cycles in space to biOIOQY research (referenced 0“ the workshep Web site:
determine whether developmental deﬁciencies are rou- http://www.FunBio.arc.nasa.gov/ISLSWG_Index.htm|).
tinely produced and that all aspects of vestibular system The ISLSWG Developmental BIOIOQY Workshop wae orga—
development,which isexquisitelysensitiveto gravitational nized by Professor Sally A- Moody, George Washington
forces, should be studied. U niversity, and Dr. Catherine Golden, NASA. Participants
In the intervening years, a number of developmental included representatives from six of theinternational space
studies in space have attempted to address these goals. agencies that are cooperating in the planning and construc—
H owever, the special requi rements of developi ng biological tiOh 01‘ the 155, established members 0f the developmental
systems, the si gniﬁcant restrictions on experimental design biology and vestibular biology research communities, and
due to hardware and ﬂight time availability, the inﬂuence intramuraI/extramural space life science researchers. De—
of lift-off, and the reliance on space ﬂight to attain periods tails about the participants, ground-based facilities, previ—
of microgravity that span a signiﬁcant portion of develop- ous ISLSWG workshops, and the ISS and literature relevant
ment have not allowed a comprehensive approach to life- to the issues discussed in this report can be found at the
cycle issues. A new facility, however, may alleviate many workshop Web site listed above.
0012-1606/00 $35.00
Copyright © 2000 by Academic Press
All rights of reproducti on in any form reserved. 1

"
"2","2 M oody and Golden
D EVELO PM ENTAL PROC ESSES T HAT whether the space environment affects the long migration
M AY BE AFFECTED BY SPAC E AN D of gametes from endoderm t0 the gonads.
REC O M M EN D ED ST U DIES The most suitable animals for these studies are those in
which gametes are produced rapidly and in large numbers or
The broad goals of the previous recommendations of the in whieh there is clear evidence for localized maternal
Space Science Board concerning the effects of the space determinants and/ or a graVIty effect (Table 1)' Extenswe
environment on developing organisms were important for preliminary StUd'eS ShOUId be performed on the ground,
establishing the initial research programs in this ﬁeld. usmg hardware that Simulates somemlcrograVIty effects
H owever, due to limited resources and intri nsic difﬁculties (e.g., CI ' nostats—_ http://server.physno| .anzona.edu/Physno|ogy/
in ﬂight—based research, only limited areas of the develop- Department/CIInostat/—and_ bioreactors— http://scnen_ce.
mental process have been investigated at a mechanistic m_sfe.nasa.gov/newhome/br/bloreactor.htm?. Such studies
level. The purpose of the ISLSWG Developmental Biology will Identify those biological systems most likely to proVIde
Workshop was to reevaluate and focus these goals. Work- Important msnghts mm the mechanisms Of space th'rOh'
shop participants evaluated progress made on characteriz— ment effects. Studies also should utilize appropriate molec-
ing the effects of the space environment on development ular markers to obtain an understanding ofthefundamental
and considered questions incl udi ng: (1)What are the i mpor— ceI I ularevents. _ _ _
tant topics in current developmental research? (2) How do Fertilizationeventsin space have been StUd'ed 'h several
these topics relate to the space life science goa|s enumer- specnes for whichfertilization oocurs externally. Th'e _has
ated in earlier reports? (3) What current techniques and not been Sthd'ed 'h mammals pnmanly because fert|||_za—
approaches used to answer fundamental questions in devel— t'oh occdrs Internal |y. It '5 recommended that mammalian
opmental biology should be utilized in related space life fertilization and early development to the blastocyst stage
science research? (4) What research facilities are available be StUd'ed ’ n Vitro usnng groundTbased faeilities (e.g., biore—
for space ﬂight and ground-based studies? (5) What are the actors) to obtain preIImInary Information before ﬂight—
appropriate animal models for developmental biology re- based or 155 StUd'eS are performed.
search in the space envi ronment?A |though many aspects of
system development and maturation take place during the M aternaI-Fetal /Neonatal Interactions
peri nata| and postnatal periods, and as such are likely to be _ _ _ _ _ _
affected by envi ronmental factors, the goal of this worki ng Obte' h' ng a normal hfe cycle W'th mammals 'h space '5
group was to evaluate four aspects of early development, a specnal challenge because the offspnng are affected by
from gametogenesis through organogenesis, and vestibular maternal physnological parameters_du_nng gestation and by
development. maternal behaVIor after birth. Preliminary studies Indicate
that there are several hurdles that wi U need to be overcome
_ _ _ _ for successful birth and development of mammalian neo—
GametogeneSIs and F er ““2317 on nates in space. In particular, survival and normal develop—
Prior reports emphasized performing multigenerational ment of neonates is dependent upon normal maternal
studies in the 155 because they may reveal cumulative behavior and normal maternaI—fetal interactions. If the
environmental effects. However, this workshop recom- space environment disrupts normal physiological processes
mends that a higher priority be to demonstrate that one full offspri ng development and survival wi ll be compromised. A
life cycle can be completed in the space envi ronment. This more complete understandi ng of these issues and strategies
has not been demonstrated for a vertebrate organism, in for dealing with them in the space environment must be
particular because we do not know whether gametogenesis addressed in ground-based studies. U nti| maternaI—fetal
occurs normally in space. Although studies in sea urchin, issues in the space environment are better understood, and
amphibian, and ﬁsh indicate that fertilization can occur, in until hardware is designed to accommodate these chal-
these cases the gametes developed while the organism was lenges, mammalian development studies should not be a
on Earth. One investigation in ﬁsh has suggested that priority for space ﬂight investigation. Once these issues
gametes formed in space are normal but further studies are have been addressed, however, access to shuttle ﬂights and
necessary to conﬁ rm this. These studies are critical because to the ISS wi ll be critical for testi ng the abi | ity of mammals
effects on gametogenesis will impact future generations to reproduce successfully in space.
duri ng |ong-term space ﬂight.
In many species, the localization of maternal molecules Pattern Formation
in the egg sets aside the germ line that will produce the
gametes for the next generation. Localized moleculesin the Some developmental defects in embryonic patterning
oocyte initiate pattern-formation events and there is evi- have been reported in the space environment for ﬂy, am—
dence in some species that gravitational forces may affect phibian, and chick. However, it is difﬁcult to postulate the
this process. Because oogenesis is a lengthy process, the ISS underlyi ng mechanisms. Fi rst, the observed defects can not
will be an essential facility for providing the necessary always be conﬁdently attributed to microgravity because
|ong—term space environment. Also, it is not known the restrictions on experimental design in the spacelabora—
Copyright ©2000 by Academic Press. All rights of reproducti on in any form reserved.

"
"3","Developmental Biology Research in Space 3
TABLE 1
Animal M odels Recommended for Studies of Development in the Space Environment
Drosophi/aa C . e/egansa Amphibiaa'b Fisha'c M ousea Rata Aviansd
S S I I P P P
Genetic and developmental mutations Yes Yes Few Yes Yes Few Few
Extensive homology to vertebrates/mammals/humans Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
at molecular level?
Availability of indicator lines? Yes Yes Few Few Few
Appropriate for space travel (hardy and smal | )? Yes Yes Yes Yes
Short life cycle? Yes Yes Yes
External development, a| lowing videotaping? Yes Yes Yes Yes
Can be studied in large numbers? Yes Yes Yes Yes
Embryos can be cooled to slow development? Yes Yes Yes Yes
Complete “fate map” of development available? Yes Yes Yes Partial
Gene expression patterns well described? Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Preliminary ﬂight data about external development Yes
available?
Eggs stratiﬁed with regard to gravity? Yes
Cytoplasmic localization of maternal factors? Yes Yes Yes
F| ight data for vesti bu|ar system development Yes
available?
M odels for human congenital defects? Yes
M odels for human disease and pathophysiology? Yes Yes
Signiﬁcant database of maternal fetal behavior? Yes

Note. S, genome sequenced; P, sequencing in progress; 1, sequence imminent.

a For more complete information refer to http://www.nih.gov/science/models.

b Attributes cited are mostly for Xenopus and P/eurode/es. Genomics and genetics refer to X . laevis and X . tropica/is.

C Attributes cited are mostly for zebraﬁ sh, but also apply to other species, especial |y for ﬂight data.

d For genomic information refer to http://www.ars.usda.gov:80/is/pr/2000/000406.htm and http://pou|try.mph.msu.edu/index.htm|.
tory have not always controlled critical conditions for notypes, suggesting candidate genes whose expressi on
normal development (e.g., vibrations and hypergravity at might be altered. Likewise, researchers working at the
lift-off anc| reentry, pH, gaseous exchange, temperature, morphogenetic level might recognize the underlying ce||
humidity). Second, it is difﬁcult to evaluate the mecha- biology of anatomical defects. In addition, researchers plan-
nisms of the underlyi ng pri mary effects because the analy- ni ng future experi ments could identify previously over-
ses have been limited mostly to morphological changes, looked critical periods or details that warrant reinvestiga-
which can be highly regulated during development by tion with molecular tools and genetic models.
adjustments in complex networks of gene expression. A Second, whenever possibleand appropriate,ﬂight studies
third difﬁculty in interpreting some of these studies is the should employ animals carrying genetic markers so that
small number of specimenswithin individual experiments. altered patterns of gene expression can be monitored in

Because of these confounding conditions, few published conjunction with morphological changes. In transparent
reports can clearly demonstrate that the space envi ronment species that develop external |y, for example, this could be
per se adversely affects em bryonic patterni ng. The general accomplished by automated ﬂuorescence videomicroscopy
impressi on at this meeting was that short-term exposure to of the living embryo carrying a green ﬂuorescent protein
the space envi ronment does not si gniﬁcantly affect pattern- transgene.
ing of embryos. However, the effects of Iong-term exposure Third, animals that produce large numbers of offspring
have not yet been studied clue to the short duration of should be used to obtain statistically signiﬁcant data sets.
sounding rocket, parabolic, or space shuttle ﬂights. The small numbers in some previous studies have pre-

To overcome these limiting conditions, four recommen- vented cause-and-effect conclusions from being drawn.
dations were put forward. First, detailed descriptions of Fourth, reasonable access to appropriate hardware must
previ ous studi es shoul cl be provi cled in a database accessi bl e be provi cled so that prel i mi nary evi dence from ground-based
to the worldwide scientiﬁc community. Such a database studies can be collected. These include c|inostats and
would include information about the size of data sets and bioreactors (see above) and centrifuges that provide hyper-
the number of specimens affected. With this information, gravity conditions (http://|ifesci.arc.nasa.gov/cgbr/cgbr.htm|).
researchers working at the genetic level could review phe— Use of such facilities to obtain preliminary data pri or to

Copyright © 2000 by Academic Press. All rights of reproducti on in any form reserved.

"
"4","4 M oody and Golden
ﬂight-based studies should be a high priority. This will (2) Is there an imprinting phase for gravity perception? (3)
better focus efforts on those developmental processes Of What developmental events lead to the differential suscep-
any) for which there is convincing evidence of gravitational tibility or predisposition to sensorimotor disorders? Fur-
effects. thermore, the ISS facilities will be most useful if they
provide the ability to apply a wide spectrum of gravity (to
Organogenesis identify whether a close dependency of effect exists), a lg
reference centrifuge, instrumentation that will allow the
A few reports suggest that early events in amphibian different types of acceleration (horizonta|,vertica|,angular)
organogenesis are affected by microgravity. However, these to be distinguished, and adequate life support to maintain
effects appear to be either transient or due to factors other animals for long periods through the entire spectrum of
than microgravity, as discussed above. Thus, it is not clear vestibular system development.
that a mi crogravity envi ronment per se perturbs organogen-
esis. Workshop participants recommend that studies of
organogenesis in the space environment be pursued only ARE HYPERG RAVITY STUDIES RELEVANT
after weII-designed, ground-based studies indicate the need TO D EV ELO PING BIO LOG ICAL SYST EM S
for further investigation. IN SPAC E?
N onetheless, there are compel | i ng data that tissue differ-
entiation and maintenance events are perturbed in space. It Because ground-based centrifuges that allow animals to
is recommended that the differentiation and maintenance be raised in a hypergravity environment are available, the
of tissues and organs systems relevant to astronaut health, issue was raised whether studying hypergravity effects
such as musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and immunologi- would provide useful information about developing sys-
ca| systems, be pursued. tems. Four points of view emerged. First, because a hyper-
gravity environment is available on the ground, some
. participants felt that this part of the gravitational force
Vestibular System Development spectrum should be studied. While these studies are easier
The vestibular system is the primary vertebrate sensory to conduct than those in the microgravity range, many
system that detects changes in gravitational force. None— objections were raised to the idea that the experiments
theless, fundamental knowledge about its development, should be performed simply because they are feasible. At
interactions with other sensory and motor systems, and least for early developmental studies, no convincing ratio-
functional regulation in space is lacki ng. It is recommended na|e was presented linki ng hypergravity effects to the space
that the followi ng areas of research receive high priority: (1) ﬂight envi ronment.
the normal development of the entire vestibular system A second viewpoint was that hypergravity studies could
from peri pheral end organs to CN S targets; (2) effects of the reveal whether lift-off forces and accompanyi ng vi brations
vestibular system on the development of other neural affect developmental processes. By recording lift-off condi—
systems G.e., formation and maintenance of neural maps, tions of particular ﬂights and simulating them on the
autonomic system); (3) effects of efferent systems on the ground it has been demonstrated that lift-off forces are
development, maintenance, and function of the peripheral relatively short-Iived and do not seem to have a signiﬁcant
vestibular apparatus; (4) effects of the vestibular system on impact on most developing systems. (Lift-off anc| reentry
the development of the postural, gait, and locomotive vibration can, however, adversely affect developing chick
control systems; (5) the mechanism by which these inter- embryos.)
acting systems allow for vestibular compensation; and (6) A third opinion was that studying the effects of hyper-
the role of the vestibular system in complex, navigational gravity on the vestibular system may be appropriate. Be-
behaviors. cause this sensory system is a ﬁ ne-tuned detector of gravi -
Initial studies of vestibular system development and tationa| force, it may be important to study the effects of
plasticity should be ground-based and focused on those the full spectrum of gravitational force. Nonetheless, for
ani mals for which there are genetic mutations that e|imi- some aspects of vesti bu|ar system development, hypergrav-
nate the peri pheral organs (avai |ab|e i n rodents and ﬁsh)and ity may si mply be a damagi ng form of oversti mu|ation and
in which the peripheral organs can be selectively ablated not provide insight into microgravity effects on develop-
during development (e.g., chick); this will allow vestibular mental processes.
system development to be studied in the absence of peri ph- Fourth, performi ng ground-based centrifuge studies is
era| input prior to the availability of the 155. Because important to determine whether centrifugation, per se,
sensitivity to gravity occurs throughout the life span, issues affects aspects of development. It is now standard practice
of plasticity should be addressed in young adults as well as to perform lg envi ronment controls of experi mental speci—
developing animals. mens during space ﬂight using an on-board centrifuge.
Several important questions should be addressed when On-board centrifuges on the 155 also will provide such
the ISS facilities become available. These include: (1) Are critical controls. In addition, assessments of centrifugal
there critical periods for the various developmental events? effects in the 155 program will determine whether the
Copyright ©2000 by Academic Press. All rights of reproducti on in any form reserved.

"
"5","Developmental Biology Research in Space 5
in—ﬂight centrifuge is an adequate control for other envi ron- national space agencies should query the research commu-
mental stresses in space that cannot be simulated on the nity to assess what types of existing animals/bioassays are
ground (e.g., radiation exposure). available. These should be used in preliminary ground-
based studies to validate their use in space. Furthermore,
agencies should encourage the creation of new indicator
WHAT FAC ILITIES AN D M OD ELS N EED organisms/bioassays that would be of particular relevance
TO BE D EV ELO PED AN D/O R UTILIZ ED to answer mechanistic questions about space environment
TO PREPARE FOR SPACE FLIGHT-BASED effects 0“ development-
EXPERIM ENTATION?
. . C O N C LU SIO N S
To prepare for the future ﬂ I ght/space—based experi menta-
tion recommended above, several recommendations are put The purpose of the ISLSWG D evelopm enta| Biology
forth. F'rSt.’ ground—based StUd'eS must be performed to Workshop wasto reevaluateand focusthe broad goalsof the
gather preliminary data before expenments are performed previous recommendations of the Space Science Board
In space. In order for t.h's to occur, Information regardrng concerning the effects of the space environment on devel—
faCIIItIesto SimulatemlcrograVIty and provnde hypergravnty oping organisms. Due to limited resources and intrinsic
must be better advertised and made available to interested difﬁculti es in ﬂi ght—based research efforts must focus on
researchers (see above for Web Sites). Second,_the research those studies that will yield the most important informa—
FommuP'tV ShOUId be organized Into multndnscnpllnary, tion. The recommendations provided herein emphasize
Interactive units to ma.“ mlze the amount Of data collected focusi ng on those problems most likely to be affected by the
from one am maI/expen ment and t0 SWdV several aspects 9f space envi ronment and usi ng ground—based prelimi nary
development Simultaneously. In addItIon, database coordl- studies weII—designed controls and appropriate animal
nation of information should occur at the onset of ﬂight- models, Focused studies now will ensure that future ISS—
based experiments for efﬁcnent dissemination 9f results. based research provides useful and relevant information on
ThIrd, focus should be on model anImals that Will provnde developing systems
the greatest information (T able 1). Genetic models and '
models that provide large numbers of offspring should
receive highest priority. This is critical for evaluating the REFERENC ES
underlying developmental mechanisms of any potential
perturbatron. AlthOUQh some partICIpants proposed usmg a Space Studies Board, National Research Council. (1987). “A Strat-
comparatlve approach because the space enVIronment may egy for Space Biology and M edical Science for the 19805 and
differential |y affect different species, the majority view was 19903"" N ational Academy Press, Washington, DC.
that dUti ng this initial inqui rY stage it is more important to Space Studies Board, N ational Research Council. (1991). “Assess-
concentrate on a few model animals. Fourth, indicator ment of Programs in Space Biology and Medicine.” National
organisms, whose changes in gene expression or other Academy Press, Washington, DC-
deveIOPmentaI events can be videotaped 0r eva|uated in Space Studies Board,.Nationa| Research COUHCHI. (199.8). “A Strat-
situ, and new, sensitive biological assays to detect subt|e ng for 59593th ”1 Space 3'0"")?” and Med'c'm ”1 the New
perturbations of ceI | u|ar processes should be used whenever century' N at'ona' Academy Press' waSh' ngton' DC'
available. These will best provide information about devel- Received for publication July 17, 2000
opmental mechanisms and allow hands-off experimenta— Revised August 15, 2000
tion, a particularly valuable attribute given the limited Accepted August 15, 2000
amount of ti me for astronaut-based experi mentation. Inter- Published online October 13, 2000
Copyright ©2000 by Academic Press. All rights of reproducti on in any form reserved.

"
