"","x"
"1","IOPSCienCG inpscience.inp.nrg
Home Search Collections Journals About Contact us My IOPscience

Microgravity experiments on ISS in order to examine a new atomization theory discovered

through normalgravity and microgravity environments

This article has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text article.

2011 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 327 012042

(http://iopscience.iop.org/1742-6596/327/1/012042)

View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage for more

Download details:

IP Address: 128.157.160.13

The article was downloaded on 12/12/2011 at 14:44

Please note that terms and conditions apply.

"
"2","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
Mierogravity experiments an 188 in order to examine a new
atomization theory discovered through normalgravity and
microgravity environments
J Osakal, S Suzukil, Y Suzuki1 and A Umemura1
1Department of Aerospace Engineering, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8603, Japan
E-mail: osaka@nuae.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract. In order to elucidate turbulent atomization processes, many studies by the use Of a
liquid jet issuing from a circular nozzle have been conducted for a long time. Although
Rayleigh’s instability has been regarded as the only determinant for the breakup of the liquid
jet, the source of the disturbances has been unclear and thus the physical explanation of
experimental results was impossible. From our experimental and numerical approaches under
normalgravity and microgravity environments, it was found that the breakup by the short—wave
mode occurs around the tip of the liquid jet without any disturbances. The long-wave mode is
caused by the existence of a nozzle eXit through a self—closed breakup cycle sustained
inherently by the capillary waves emanated from the tip of the liquid jet after every breakup.
Our ﬁlrther experiments revealed the existence of the relaxation region which gives a
reasonable explanation of the extremely large breakup length. In addition, the two-valueness 0f
the breakup length was found through a lot of experimental results. Establishment of a new
breakup theory enable to explain all Of experimental results requires long-period microgravity
environments and the currently-projected experiments on 188 are introduced in the present
paper.
1. Introduction
Liquid atomization processes are very important in engineering applications using liquid fuel such as
rocket engines, gas turbines including jet engines, automobile engines and so on. In addition, this
technology is essential to ink-jet printers. Against such practical backgrounds, many studies on liquid
atomization processes have been conducted. A snapshot representing typical atomization processes is
depicted in ﬁgure. 1. A high-speed liquid jet is injected from a circular nozzle. Liquid atomization
processes are categorized into three phases. The nondimensional number characterizing each phase is
gas Weber number deﬁned as
U2
WC} 2 m (1)
0
where pg, U, a and Georrespond to gas density, velocity difference between gas and liquid, a radius
of liquid jet and surface tension coefﬁcient, respectively. Gas Weber number corresponds to the ratio
of gas dynamic pressure to surface tension in two-phase ﬂow ﬁelds. Just downstream of the nozzle
exit, denoted as the region A in ﬁgure. 1, the small-scale disturbances are induced on the liquid surface.
Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd 1

"
"3","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
Since gas Weber number in the region A is sufﬁciently larger than 0(1) due to the large velocity
difference, the effects of surface tension is small and the formation of such disturbances are dominated
by the characteristics of turbulence. Such disturbances cause the formation of the ﬁne liquid ligaments
in the region B, Where gas Weber number is 0(1) due to the small scale of the liquid ligaments and the
small local velocity difference. Therefore, the effects of surface tension dominate the behaviour of the
liquid ligaments and their breakup. Gas Weber number of the ﬂow ﬁeld occupied by many small
droplets formed from liquid ligaments is smaller than 0(1). In order to predict the characteristics of
droplets (e.g. drop-size distribution), the ﬂow ﬁeld in the region B must be correctly understood. Since
such ﬂow ﬁeld is too high-speed and small to be observed directly, a certain approach has been
adopted for a long time. A ﬁne liquid ligament is replaced by a lOW-speed and large-scale liquid j et in
accordance With Weber’s analogy. In conventional experiments, a liquid jet was injected from a
circular nozzle along the direction of gravity as depicted in ﬁgure 2. Although the effects of
gravitational acceleration must be taken into account, they have been unnoticed for a long time. The
corresponding nondimensional number is Bond number, Which is expressed as follow.
2
B0 = ﬂ (2)
a
,0 is liquid density. The scale of the original liquid ligaments is so small that the corresponding Bond
number is essentially small. However, such traditional replacement can make Bond number larger than
that of the original liquid ligaments, Which has led to the misunderstanding of the physics underlying
' "" '_ Nun]: lL' 'd' 1'.
' ._ ‘5' -' -- """"--+ l 111 E
' "":Iml‘ﬂﬁ 1"" I ' :1 J
.L- ng ., . 13a
* _ -. 1.; E '
I 1 "" -._ ""E"" -I- "".
_“' 5. d HIT ':--_..-:.
'.- 'I- II. _ ' - L G .' . l
._ __ J_[II _ f, u: H: rﬂutﬂtmnﬂ
-' f l. ;' g’ﬂj _ acmleratinn
I u I I 171-""?- ‘- II‘I' I
. _ .:I -'.'II' _: -'-'.- 1.- I :
.-- Jim}: '. - "" .911”: ,' C :
I'. *:r""-'IL'.4 '.' ' {5' ‘I'
""l"" .
Figure 1. A schematic of typical liquid atomization Figure 2. A typical snapshot
processes. The region surrounded by a dotted circle obtained through conventional
corresponds to the target of the present study. experiments.
t . - ..
- - *- ’ . ' I.
_ 1 I
‘ '4.
_ - I _
__ _ I
_ I
_ I
Figure 3. Successive images obtained from a microgravity experiment under high-pressure
condition.
2

"
"4","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
the liquid atomization processes for a long time. The most simple and effective way is to remove the
effect of graVity. From this Viewpoint, Umemura et al [1] carried out the experiments as illustrated in
ﬁgure 2 under microgravity environments. In order to realize the ﬂow ﬁeld with small gas Weber
number and composed of the liquid jet large enough to get snapshots with sufﬁcient temporal and
spatial resolution, liquid SF6 was injected from a circular nozzle into high-pressure N2 atmosphere.
The typical snapshots obtained from the microgravity experiments are shown ﬁgure 3. In ﬁgure 3, the
radius of the nozzle and the ambient pressure were 0.2 mm and 6.0 MPa, respectively. Gas Weber
number is 0.133 and thus the ﬂow ﬁeld around liquid ligaments in turbulent atomization was well
simulated. The mechanism conventionally used for the explanation of liquid jet disintegration is that
proposed by Rayleigh [2]. According to the theory of Rayleigh, the long-wave surface deformation is
the only determinant for the breakup of the liquid jet in a laminar case. However, the wavelength
observed in the microgravity experiments is smaller even if the effect of gas dynamic pressure and
Viscosity are considered [3-5] and the breakup conﬁguration is so different from that derived from the
theories of Rayleigh. This breakup conﬁguration was named as ‘short-wave mode” by Umemura [6].
What is important is the fact that the breakup in the short-wave mode occurs without any disturbances
as long as there eXist the tip of the liquid jet. On the other hand, the breakup due to the long-wave
disturbances, namely ‘long-wave mode”, ineVitably requires some kind of disturbances. The breakup
in the long-wave mode is usually observed even in laminar ﬂow ﬁelds. In such cases, the sources of
the disturbances were unclear in the theories of Rayleigh and have been usually attributed to the ones
existing inside of a nozzle or in nature according to the previous researches. Depending on the
experimental conditions, such approaches lead to the incorrectly small initial amplitude of the
disturbances at the nozzle eXit. This value is unable to give reasonable answers to the repeatability of
the experimental results. In order to investigate the breakup processes of a liquid jet in detail, authors
have been carried out the experiments as illustrated in ﬁgure 2 by the use of pure water not only on
normalgraVity but also on microgravity environments. From our experimental results and numerical
approaches [6], the periodic breakup of a liquid jet is sustained through a self—olosed breakup cycle
requiring inherently no external disturbances. Keys to the self—olosed breakup cycle are the capillary
waves emanated from the tip of liquid j et and the behaVior of the waves at nozzle eXit. In addition, the
further experiments elucidated the determinants other than the waves eXisting on the liquid jet. In
order to investigate the further physics underlying the breakup of the liquid jet, the long-term
microgravity experiments on International Space Station (188) are currently projected with the aid of
JAXA. In the present paper, an outline of our breakup theory and the ourrently-projeoted space
experiments are provided along with the several experimental results.
2. An outline of a new breakup theory
2.1. Capillary and unstable waves
First of all, let us consider waves on a liquid jet issuing from a circular nozzle by the use of a ﬂow
ﬁeld of a liquid column with an inﬁnite length. Here the assumptions are adopted that the effects of
gas pressure, Viscosity and velocity distribution of a liquid j et are negligible for simplicity. In addition,
the coordinate moving at the same speed as that of the liquid jet are used. These assumptions give the
similar analyses proposed by Rayleigh [2]. This analysis corresponds to the pressure imbalance
between neck and bulge parts of the small-amplitude surface deformation on an inﬁnite liquid column.
The surface deformation 5 is expressed in a nondimensional form as follow,

3 =3 exp{i(kx — mm} (3)

a a
where a, 8, k and a) are an initial radius of a liquid column, an initial amplitude, wavenumber and
angular frequency, respectively. The following dispersion equation is derived by the linearization of
the equations of continuity and motion around the basic ﬂow ﬁeld and by the appropriate boundary
conditions.

3

"
"5","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
61 2 I (ka)
(a) —j = — (ka){/ — (ka)2 }1— (4)
V 10 (k0)
V = /£ (5)
,061

Im(x) is the n-th modiﬁed Bessel function. a) is a pure imaginary number and corresponds to the
temporal growth rate of the disturbances. Due to the local curvature of the generating line and the
circumferential directions, the pressure differences between the neck and the bulge parts are generated.
When the nondimensional wavelength 2/61 = 271/ (k61) exceeds 271, the ﬂow ﬁeld is unstable. Physically
speaking, the pressure at the neck parts exceeds that at the bulge parts. This pressure difference
generates the liquid ﬂows from the neck parts into the bulge parts and ﬁnally leads to the breakup of
the liquid column. Such waves are called as unstable waves. According to the linear stability analysis,
the disturbance with 2/61 = 9 gives maximum growth rate. Growth of the unstable wave by numerical
simulation is illustrated in ﬁgure. 5. The governing equation adopted is the aXially-symmetrie
incompressible NaVier-Stokes equation for nonevaporating liquid and gas. The effect of the surface
tension was expressed by the continuous surface force method [7]. The ﬂow ﬁeld was assumed to be
periodic in the aXial direction. The details of the numerical methods were described in [8]. A
sinusoidal surface deformation with 8/61 = 0.01 was added to a stationary liquid column. The aXially-
elongated surface conﬁguration of the neck part and the small satellite formed after the breakup
between the main droplets are characteristics of the breakup in the long-wave mode. The breakup

conﬁguration illustrated in ﬁgure 4 is quite different from that in ﬁgure 3 as noted above.

In the case where 2/61 is less than 271, the solutions corresponding to the neutral propagative
capillary wave can be obtained. Their phase speed CR can be obtained from the equation (4) and
expressed as follow.

I k
6—K : M0161 _ i) (6)
V 10 (ka) ka
From (6) it is clear that the capillary waves with the shorter wavelength give the larger phase speed
and this property is important for the realization of the self—elosed breakup cycle noted later. In the
linear stability analysis, only the solutions corresponding to a single capillary wave component is
obtained. Although the properties of the unstable and the capillary waves are explained here, it is still
unclear how such waves, in other words, ‘disturbanees’ are generated. In the next subsection, the
sources of disturbances and the breakup in the short-wave mode are investigated through a problem
related to contraction of a liquid column.
2.2. Short-wave mode and a source of capillary waves
In order to investigate the short-wave mode and the role of the capillary waves driven by a liquid tip, a
1.11 i
| [VIE 1..va
ﬂa — 1
~11} 2.1] W5
Figure 4. Growth of the most unstable wave on a liquid column. Gray-seale corresponds to
pressure inside of the liquid column.
4

"
"6","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
numerical simulation of an initially static liquid column were carried out as shown in ﬁgure 5 (a). The
same governing equations in the previous subsection were adopted. The conditions of the ﬂow ﬁeld
are similar to those of our microgravity experiments. The deﬁnitions of the characteristics parts are
illustrated in ﬁgure 5 (b). The breakup of the liquid column occurs at approximately tV/a = 20 and the
surface conﬁguration around the breakup point is quite similar to the experimental results in ﬁgure 3.
Since the tip bulb is attracted due to surface tension of the liquid column, it moves upstream with
‘swallowing’ its upstream liquid and enlarging its size. The resulting pressure decrease in the tip bulb
observed in ﬁgure 5 (a) is necessary for the breakup in the short-wave mode. As a necessary condition
for the breakup in the short-wave mode, the radius of the tip bulb must be larger than 2a. In addition,
the linear surface conﬁguration just upstream in the 1st neck observed in ﬁgures 3 and 5 (a) also plays
an important role in sustaining the liquid ﬂow into the tip bulb through its sufﬁcient pressure rise. The
breakup in the short-wave mode has no direct relationship to liquid issue speed and has a speciﬁc
frequency.

As the tip contraction occurs, the capillary waves are emanated and propagate upstream as
illustrated in ﬁgure 5. Although inherently a group of waves propagates due to its dispersive nature,
the propagation speed of each capillary wave component follows the equation (6) [9]. By focusing on
the locations of the neck parts, the movement of the capillary wave components is tracked as
illustrated in ﬁgure 5 (0). Due to their dispersive nature, the capillary wave components gradually
increase its wavelength with decreasing their propagation speed. Finally their propagation speed
gradually reach an asymptotic value [6], in other words a steady-eapillary wave is formed. V in the
equation in (5) corresponds to the analytically-derived asymptotic speed and nearly equal to the
contraction speed of the liquid column. The gray line in ﬁgure 5 (0) corresponds to the contraction
speed and its agreement with the analytical one is satisfactory. During the contraction process, the
total surface area of a liquid column decreases in accordance with the minimum surface area principle.
The decrease in the surface energy is transferred upstream through the capillary wave [6]. By adding
the jet issue speed U to the ﬂow ﬁeld noted above, we can discuss a liquid jet issuing from a nozzle.
However, unless the effects of nozzle remain clear, the further discussion is impossible. The
conversion of the capillary waves reaching at a nozzle eXit is discussed in the following subsection.
2.3. A self—elosed breakup cycle
It was clariﬁed that capillary waves propagate upstream due to contraction of a liquid tip in the
previous subsection. The Capillary waves with large propagation speed and small wavelength can
(a) — u (c)

3
:3 40 _ , . . .
H ‘HAAA‘..0
[3 30 :3:\<>\ \ aw“ ° 0 . .
'5 g i‘:\:‘x>\<>\<> \A\\A\ .
FEE IS 20 0 Tip .A‘ ‘<>\<>\<>\<> \A_1l
_ r nee \ \L .
”’3 41.4 1-2 113313 Nfa 10 1 333:3: “x.“ “u;
(b) I“, hag 0 : 93:22:11:
_ 0 5 10 15 20
' ' tV/a
ﬁrdncuL Endnucl. 15'- 11::1: T511 I‘ll”-
Figure 5. (a) Numerical simulation of contraction of a liquid column. (b) Deﬁnitions of the
characteristic parts on the contracting liquid column. (0) Upstream propagation of capillary waves
emanated from the liquid tip.
5

"
"7","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
reach a nozzle eXit in the ease of a liquid jet. In addition, although the situation including only one
breakup is considered in the previous subsection, capillary waves would be emanated after each
breakup not depending on breakup modes. Through Doppler-shift at the nozzle eXit the wavelength of
the capillary waves becomes larger [6, 9]. The properties of the resulting wave can be described
through the following equations,

2ﬂ[ﬂ E) : {CAM _2} (kg) 2 {—CRU‘ “) +2} (k’a) (k’a > 1) (7—1)

U V V V V V
faU _ CR(ka) U} _[Uj , , <
27z[U V) { V V (ka) V (ka) (ka 1) (7 2)
where k’a and f correspond to nondimensional wavenumber of a wave component subjected to
Doppler-shift and its frequency, respectively. In addition, fa/U corresponds to Strouhal number. For
example, U/ V = 2.0 ease gives a solution of xl/a = 1.10 under the assumption that the most unstable
waves noted above dominate the breakup characteristics. At least in laminar injection cases, there
always eXist the capillary waves converted into the unstable waves through Doppler-shirt. In other
words, the unstable waves are spontaneously generated at the nozzle eXit without any external
disturbances. In addition, “reproduction” of the waves at the nozzle eXit also has an important role for
sustaining the formation of the unstable waves [6]. Once the waves oonveoting (or propagating)
downstream are formed just at the nozzle eXit, the same waves continues to be formed. The amplitude
of the waves formed owning to the reproduction process becomes smaller as time passes in the ease of
U/ V > 1. However, the continuous generation of the unstable waves is possible by the capillary waves
emanated after each breakup. The concept explained above corresponds to a self—olosed breakup cycle
of a liquid jet proposed by Umemura [6]. By looking for answers not to unidentiﬁed disturbances but
to the capillary waves generated by the liquid jet itself, the repeatability of experimental results can be
explained well. However, not all of experimental results can be explained only by the use of the self-
olosed breakup cycle. The additional characteristics of a liquid jet are described in the section 4 along
with our experimental results.
3. Experimental setup and image processing
3.1. Experimental setup
Almost all of the following experimental apparatuses were commonly used in both our normalgraVity
and microgravity experiments. A schematic of the experimental setup is illustrated in ﬁgure 6. A back-
light method was used for obtaining clear successive images of a liquid jet. As a light source, an array
of high-intensity LEDs made by Opto Supply was arranged in the test section. Luminosity and
diffusion angle of each LED are 6000 mod and 60 deg, respectively. In order to obtain brightness
distribution as uniform as possible, a holographic diffuser made by Edmund Optics was adopted. A
variable resistance incorporated in the LED circuit can ﬁnely modulate the brightness. The light
source is driven by direct current supplied from the experiment facilities. Images of a liquid jet were
taken by a high-speed camera. A planar aluminum mirror was used to obtain an appropriate optical
path. A high-speed camera made by Photron was adopted owning to its performance and impact
resistance necessary for the experiments in a drop tower. Exposure time was set as 1/ 15000 s and
frame rate was set as 4000 fps. The length able to capture in the liquid issue direction can be changed
approximately from 130 mm to 200 mm by modulating the optical system. Images stored in the high-
speed camera were downloaded into a PC through an optical ﬁber cable. Frame rate 4000 fps
corresponds to approximately 4.1 s. After ﬂow ﬁeld reaches a quasi-steady state, a start trigger was
transferred to the high-speed camera. Pure water was stored in a syringe and issued through a nozzle
part. The syringe and the nozzle part were connected by the use of a tube made by Teﬂon. Water
installed in the syringe was pushed by a raok-and-pinion system made by Oriental motor. There is a
possibility that controlling ﬂow rate by the use of a ﬂow meter cannot follow pressure ﬂuctuations at a
nozzle eXit. Since the radii of the syringe and the nozzle eXit can be measured in advance, water ﬂow
6

"
"8","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
Processor —
High-speecf| -/ Syringe M.otor
camera , -%._._._-¢ -
[- Filter(d=40um)
-_|I Thermocouple| . — I
XYZO stage - _' i _e I C - ’ u
I 151:}; Liquid Speed controller
.2111 reservoir
s IIII|§.
_ IMF Holographic
Flat mirror(Al coat) E 2. diffuser
—
Liquid recovery unit
Figure 6. A schematic of experimental setup.
rate itself can be controlled by controlling the moving speed of the rack. It takes at most 2 s to achieve
a oonstant-speed movement of rack. A liquid recovery unit was used only in the normalgraVity
experiments. The nozzle parts made of stainless were composed of an upstream entrance region and a
downstream nozzle section. The length and the radius of the entrance region are 20 and 4.35 mm,
respectively. The thickness of the nozzle section is 0.5mm. The radii of the nozzle eXit are 0.39, 0.56,
0.80 and 1.03mm, respectively. Although the experimental space on 188 is a little smaller than that on
the drop tower and the parabolic ﬂight facilities the authors have used so far, the fundamental
arrangement can be applied directly to the space experiments.
3.2. Image processing
Many images with resolution jmax Ximax = 1024 X 128 pixel can be obtained after each experiment as
depicted in ﬁgure 7. In order to extract information related to the breakup process of a liquid jet, its
surface conﬁguration must be correctly captured. Since the number of successive images obtained
from one experiment exceeds 10,000, Virtual judgement is impractical. Appropriate methods tracking
a liquid tip are necessary. The tip-traoking method previously used in our studies is described in [10]
in detail. By the use of the minimum and the maximum (strictly speaking, the mode value of the
background) brightness of raw images, new ones with the larger contrast were used for detecting the
location of the liquid tip in this method. However, in the less resolved ease, unphysioal oscillations of
the tip location were caused by the small non-uniformity of baoklight and by the existence of small
satellites formed between main droplets. In addition, there is a difﬁculty in determining the threshold
value of the brightness determining the liquid tip. Instead of this method, another method was adopted
in which the new images are constructed by subtracting the background brightness from the original
images as illustrated in ﬁgure 7 (b). This procedure reverses the brightness of the original images and
thus the liquid surface is expressed by the white region. The minimum brightness at the j th location,
3mg), can be obtained by comparing the brightness from i = 1 to i = imax. Detecting a sudden
decrease in 3mg) from j = jnozzge to jmax, the liquid tip can be speciﬁed as jtip. It was found that the
images obtained through this method are less susceptible to the non-uniformity of the backlight and to
the effects of the satellites. A typical time history of the tip location obtained through the procedures
denoted above is shown in ﬁgure 7 (0). During one experiment, breakup occurs many times. A sudden
decrease in the tip location corresponds to one breakup. Breakup length is deﬁned as the length from
the nozzle eXit to the liquid tip just after a certain breakup as illustrated in ﬁgure 7 (b). One breakup
length plotted as one point in graphs in the section 4 is the mode value evaluated by the use of all
breakup information obtained from one experiment. Together with the mode value, the standard
deviation is also evaluated and expressed as error bars.
7

"
"9","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
(a) _ .- .-'i~""---=-=.;'-- l.-. _ Eaukgmund
-. 1' 5.1;} .- I -
_ -. (C)
:_'::_ _ :_._' . 2135 Am
- . __.| E
+1?“ in '- . _ ' -9 I '
(b) 255 E | -'1,' I311 ' '
_ Ercakup 11.11th LB EC '
215‘? 1-‘ram: mum
.i
Figure 7. Schematics of image processing. (a) Typical images obtained from an experiment. (b)
Images obtained through background elimination. The white vertical lines indicate the tip
locations judged by our program. The ﬁgures on the right upper side correspond to frame number.
(0) Typical time history of the tip locations.
4. Experimental results
4.1. Difference in breakup conﬁguration due to graVity
Typical snapshots obtained from the experiments under normalgraVity and microgravity environments
are listed in ﬁgure 8. The nozzle of a = 1.03 mm was used in each experiment. In all images, the
brightness is modulated for improvements in the Visualization. Hereinafter, U/ V is deﬁned as the ratio
of eross-seetional average liquid issue speed at the nozzle exit to the analytical tip contraction speed
expressed in the equation (5) unless otherwise noted. Under microgravity environments, the critical
U/ V determining the dominant breakup mode is nearly 1.58. This value can be derived by considering
the displacement of the 1st neck part and the liquid ﬂow rate entering the tip liquid bulb during one
breakup [6]. In the U/V = 1.98 and 2.49 eases, the long-wave mode ﬁxes the breakup length. The
signiﬁcant difference in the breakup conﬁguration is observed in the U/V = 1.23 and 1.50 cases
depending on the existence of gravitational acceleration. Local U/V gradually increases in the aXial
direction due to gravitational acceleration (Bond number is approximately 0.146 in ﬁgure 8) and
ﬁnally exceeds 1.58. In this case, the unstable waves eonvecting downstream increase their amplitude
and ﬁnally the breakup length is ﬁxed by the long-wave mode even in the ease of U/ V < 1.58. In the
case where the nozzle of a = 0.39 mm was used, the short-wave mode can ﬁX the breakup length even
under normalgraVity environment due to the small Bond number [6].
The Larger liquid issue speed causes the larger breakup length intuitively. However, this intuition
UN E —1- H} H a
-I—F '
L23 I'___.—__._.-':,.:]. :G G I':'."" - - - - ' -: 7 ': :.
|_5ﬂ wID: :5 :F— 3 '-_—'—_.—.._£-I:-= .f :q :- 1 t:
lggmjﬂ $55m-='—=—'='3
3_4g:=:—-—_~12;+ =12: =:.-—a--—__.¢ :::-: :2 :
Mierngravity Nnnnalgﬁwity
Figure 8. Difference in breakup conﬁgurations caused by gravitational acceleration. A nozzle of a
= 1.03 mm was used in each experiment.
8

"
"10","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
does not always hold judging from the images shown in ﬁgure 8. Either the effects of the gas dynamic
pressure or Viscosity [3-5] are unable to explain this phenomenon correctly. The ﬂow ﬁeld shown in
ﬁgure 8 is inherently laminar according to the turbulence standard of Reynolds, Rep < 2300. This is
true judging from their smooth surface conﬁguration. Turbulence inside of the nozzle alone is not the
correct answer to such phenomenon. In order to investigate such phenomenon, a lot of experiments
were carried out by the use of the several nozzles and the the results are shown in the next subsection.
4.2. Existence of relaxation region
The breakup length obtained from normalgraVity experiments by the use of the nozzles of Ln = 30 mm
is shown in ﬁgure 9. Experiments by the use of a certain nozzle were repeatedly conducted at least
twice in order to examine their repeatability. The experimental results in ﬁgure 9 show a sufﬁcient
agreement with the ones conducted by the other researchers [11, 12], which suggests the eXistence of
the breakup mechanism independent of the disturbances inside of nozzles at least in laminar cases. The
jumps in the breakup length around small U/ V are caused due to gravitational acceleration as noted in
the previous subsection. Figure 9 shows that a lot of experimental results can be classiﬁed into two
breakup modes, namely long distance breakup (LDB) and short distance breakup (SDB) modes. The
breakup length for the nozzles of the small radius has a tendency to belong to the LDB mode and Vice
versa for the nozzles of the large radius. This tendency is deeply related to the ﬂow ﬁeld inside of the
nozzle. Flow entering a circular tube goes downstream with developing its velocity distribution. If
length of a tube is sufﬁciently large, the velocity distribution approaches that of well-known Hagen-
Poiseuille ﬂow perfectly in a laminar case. Since this tendency is characterised by Reynolds number
Rep = 20h/(U/V), the velocity distribution of the liquid issuing from the nozzles of smaller radius is
likely to approach such velocity distribution. In the previous researches the effects of velocity
distribution was suggested [5, 13]. However, the instabilities induced by such ﬂow ﬁeld have not been
investigated in detail. Umemura [6] performed the linear stability analysis as to the liquid ﬂow with
such velocity distribution. It was found that the increase in A( U/V) gives the smaller growth rate of the
unstable waves and ﬁnally the unstable waves disappear in the case of A(U/V) > 2.0. Here A(U/V)
corresponds to the nondimensional maximum difference of the parabolic velocity distribution. A( U/V)
= 0 corresponds to the uniform velocity distribution. This effect is understood as a situation where a
rigid body (corresponding to a limit of ﬂow with larger momentum) is inserted into liquid. In addition,
even if the velocity distribution is perfectly that of Hagen-Poiseuille ﬂow, Viscosity of liquid relaxes
the velocity distribution as goes downstream and ﬁnally nearly uniform velocity distribution is
achieved. This suggests that the breakup length shown in ﬁgure 9 includes a “relaxation region’ which
is inherently independent of the growth of the unstable wave. In ﬁgure 9, a Boussinesq line is also
shown on the assumption that the velocity relaxation is the opposite phenomenon to the development
of the velocity distribution inside of the nozzle. Although this is a crude assumption, it is found that
the relaxation region occupies the large part of the breakup length. Since the liquid ‘surface’ velocity
increases gradually within the relaxation region, the capillary waves propagating upstream are subject
to Doppler-shift and their wavelength gradually become larger during their upstream propagation. The
larger wavelength corresponds to the smaller propagation speed. The decrease in the propagation
speed of the capillary waves, which is caused by the increase in their wavelength, changes their
propagation direction into the downstream direction. The increase in the wavelength continues during
their downstream propagation and ﬁnally their nondimensional wavelength exceeds 1 [6]. Such waves
coming back to a uniform velocity region obtains the nature of the unstable wave. This suggests that
the relaxation region is identical to the nozzle eXit. In fact, if we evaluate an initial amplitude without
considering the relaxation region, an invalid value smaller than an intermolecular distance is obtained
for the experimental results by the use of the nozzle of a = 0.39 mm. Such unphysically small value
cannot explain the sufﬁcient repeatability and the independency of experimental apparatuses.
As U/ V increases, Rep approaches 2300 which is the criterion classifying laminar and turbulent pipe
ﬂows investigated by Reynolds. The intermittent change in the breakup length, which corresponds to
9

"
"11","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
300 o ,

‘3 L =30m1n . . ///

E 8‘ W852""? I 1 ""

5250 III Eogoﬁﬁjioimgp ,’ ""II ’1‘/’

‘53) V a=1.03mm,u=0.7380P /’ §-’:?§ I /’

g i O a=0.39mm,u=1.29cP ,’ I 7:115: . ,

#200 D a=0.80mm,u=1.19cP ’ ‘51.. g /

Q V a=1.03mm,u=1.100P I E939: ‘. ,’ .

5 Q V! E .

3% x 3E uté / A I o '

O) 1’ ‘Y‘? 3 // C 3 .

23150 LDB 3.4-2; 1 .. :

'73 1 EEE 9’ .1. l 0 h.

g /’ _’”'§O /’ u."" ii I 6 .

$100 x’ ""tfv' ’/ 0‘ :30 3 _ .3 'j .-

q z naggin- . . lgiil‘ﬁl‘ﬁl

O ’ 4“?""- =: I 7‘3 PE""! 1!. ¢-

,§ -35""? $573!: 32% 9 32¢ ?..- g 3’” .

g 50 I - - - ES? - i - - . -

Z x’ '_I ,9 ' --

’/ Oaliéévk.’ SDB
0 1 2 , 3, ,4 , , 5 6 7 8
N0nd1mens10na1 11qu1d 1ssue speed U/V
Figure 9. Difference in breakup process caused by gravitational acceleration. A nozzle of a = 1.03
mm was used in each experiment. LDB and SDB correspond to long breakup distance and short
breakup, respectively.
[NV 3‘ 1135'an Ln— 30mm, ”—1.29 GP 1"" 3"" a
Figure 10. Typical images obtained from experiments by the use of a nozzle of a = 0.39mm.
the large error bars in ﬁgure 9, is thought to be caused by the vortices shed from the separation bubble
formed at the nozzle entrance region. In the case where U/ V exceeds a certain value, the transition into
the fully developed turbulent ﬂow occurs Within the nozzle. In addition to the more uniform velocity
distribution, the disturbances shed from the nozzle dominate the breakup of the liquid jet and the
sudden decrease in the breakup length accompanied by so irregular and large-amplitude surface
deformation is observed as illustrated in ﬁgure 10. The value of the critical Reynolds number 2300
may not be directly applicable to our experimental results since this value was determined from the
experimental results by the use of sufﬁciently long pipes. In our experiments, the length of the nozzle
is comparatively small and the ﬂow ﬁeld inside of the nozzle is subject to the disturbances coming
from downstream. On the contrary, the SDB mode is not always dominated by the turbulence inside of
the nozzles. The surface conﬁguration of the liquid jet classiﬁed into the SDB mode seems different
depending on the radii of nozzles. In order to examine the breakup characteristics in the SDB mode,
let us focus on the breakup length obtained from the experiments by the nozzle of a = 1.03mm.
4.3. TWO-Valueness of breakup length
It is observed that the breakup length for the nozzle of a = 1.03 mm takes two values for a certain
liquid issue speed as illustrated in ﬁgure 11. Each value is categorized into either the LDB or the SDB
mode. The typical images for U/V=1.78 are shown in ﬁgure 12. The critical U/ V corresponding to R613
= 2300 in the ease of ,u = 1.10 eP (0h = 4.00 X 103) is 4.60. Since U/V is smaller than the half of the
critical value and both of liquid j et seems laminar judging from the smoothness of the surface
conﬁgurations and the regular breakup pattern, it is unlikely that the SDB mode is not always
10

"
"12","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
dominated by turbulence. Such laminar SDB case is observed in the experimental results of the
nozzles of comparatively small Ln/a. If the velocity distribution inside of the nozzle does not fully
develop at the nozzle eXit, the length of the relaxation region would be small and the SDB mode is
more realizable. In fact, the smaller Viscosity (,u = 0.738 CP case) gives the narrow U/V range where
the two-valueness is observed as illustrated in ﬁgure 11. Although the feasibility of the breakup length
in the laminar SDB mode is described as above, the two-valueness is not fully explained yet. One of
the possibilities is that a slight difference in the start conditions of the liquid injection can affect the
velocity distribution inside and eventually outside of the nozzle. The energy transferred from the
liquid tip to the nozzle eXit through the capillary waves propagating upstream is comparatively large
[6]. Since capillary waves with larger wavelength have larger amplitude due to their dispersive nature,
the energy disturbing the liquid ﬂow inside of the nozzle is larger at the beginning of liquid injection
than that at the quasi-steady breakup state. There is a possibility that such large energy affects
separation bubbles at the entrance of the nozzle parts and their change can lead to more uniform
velocity distribution at the nozzle eXit than that of the LDB mode. Put another way, the ‘ooupling’ of
the internal and the external ﬂow ﬁelds can cause the laminar SDB mode. If the energy sufﬁcient
enough to affect the ﬂow inside of the nozzle is not transferred to the nozzle eXit at the beginning of
injection, the velocity distribution would be dominated only by Viscosity inside of the nozzle and the
LDB mode appears. However, the laminar SDB mode case was not observed. The detailed condition
for the realization of the laminar SDB mode has not been clear yet. In order to validate and control the
realization of the two-valueness, a lot of experiments in the same condition are necessary.
200|___ . D .
g | Ln=30rnm D Q;
m I v a=1.03mm =0.738cP I O (53
,4 a ll , El E E O
Q I v a=1.03mm, u=1.10cP /’ 85' O 2(3)
30150 D u 8
E <> 509 ” §
Q I,” El v El ﬁlm
.24: ’1’ '3 <> 6
<1) ,’
5100 LDB /’ E
7:: ,I’ y
.5 ’ §$§ i
am a%% gag ea §§§
a; D §- § __D___-----—-----'
E ‘9 D - SDB
O
O Y El v @Eﬁo
l 2 3
Nondimensional liquid issue speed U/V
Figure 11. Two-valueness of breakup length on a certain liquid issue speed. The results for a
nozzle of a = 1.03mm is emphasized in this ﬁgure. Symbols corresponding to other experimental
conditions are the same as ones in ﬁgure 11. LDB and SDB correspond to long distance breakup
and short distance breakup, respectively.
a= 1-03mi... = 311111111
[1:].-IDEI: LIN = LE 1"" I H.
m+— |c+ .1.
Figure 12. Typical images indicating two-valueness of breakup length.
11

"
"13","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
5. Experiments on 188

As noted above, gravity affects the generation of the unstable waves through acceleration of liquid
issuing from a nozzle. In addition to the destabilization of the capillary wave, the unstable wave
cannot keep its wavelength during its convection. These effects appear dominantly in the small U/V
case. In addition, it is predicted that the length of the relaxation region becomes smaller due to the
gravity in the small U/ V and large 80 cases. Since our new breakup theory must be examined through
experimental results, it is desirable to remove What affects the breakup conﬁguration, gravity in this
case. The best solution is the microgravity experiments. However, the limitation to the number of
experiments has prevented from obtaining the sufﬁcient number of the microgravity experimental
results and then the repeatability has not fully conﬁrmed yet. In particular, the existence of two-
Valueness has only been conﬁrmed only on the normalgraVity condition and must be also examined on
the microgravity environment through multiple experiments.

Several experiments are projected Where the liquid issue speed is changed through several stages
as illustrated in ﬁgure 13. Initial U/ V is approximately 1.10 for all of the experiments. Before
obtaining the maximum liquid issue speed (U/V)max, the liquid issue speed is increased through 20
phases by an interval of A(U/V)= (U/V)max /20. Since then the liquid issue speed is decreased by
A(U/V) = (U/ V)max/ 10 through 10 phases. In order to distinguish several types of experiments clearly,
such experiments and the ones described in section 4 are named as the continuous and the single
injection experiments, respectively. On the basis of the previous experiments, the time interval of a
certain constant liquid issue speed is determined as approximately 4 s. The total experimental time
amounts to approximately 120 s. Since all of the images from the beginning to the end of the liquid
injection are unable to be obtained due to the limitation of memories installed on a high-speed camera,
the images corresponding to approximately 50 breakups after reaching the steady liquid issue speed
are realized for every U/V. Such long-period experiments are realizable only on 188. High-speed
((U/V)max = (U/V) CF, in section 4) and low-speed ((U/V)max = 2) experiments are projected. The low-
speed ease includes the region Where the breakup length is dominated by the short-wave mode Which
is peculiar to microgravity environment (U/V< 1.58). The breakup in the short-wave mode is affected
by the large-amplitude capillary waves reﬂected at the nozzle eXit. Therefore, around the nozzle eXit
the strong interference of the capillary waves can be observed in detail and the waves formed on the
liquid surface can differ from those for the single injection experiments. It follows that the low-speed
continuous inj eotion experiments are suitable to investigate the effects of the time histories of capillary
waves. In the high-speed continuous injection ease, along With effects of the time histories, the two-
Valueness of the breakup length can be examined. There is a possibility that even on the experimental
conditions Where both SDB and LDB are observed in the single injection experiments, SDB only
realizes in the continuous ones. In addition, by the use of the nozzles of the several radii and lengths,
the effects of nozzle Will be examined.

Furthermore, the experiments aimed at obtaining the correlation functions for the time histories of
the liquid tip location are planned. As noted above, the capillary waves emanated from the liquid tip

UmaaNI -
,. ,. .. ”—l—l—LLE

..- ""' I E a

.- """" _' '|_
1.1 _ : DU=-;Umaw-WNV EPU .

HJ- - - - -

. . - - I13
{113] WEI]
n ' "" t
Figure 13. A schematic of representative microgravity experiments on 188.
12

"
"14","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
have the roles of upstream energy transfer and generation of the resulting unstable waves at the nozzle
eXit. The correlation of the time histories of the liquid tip can give the information related to the wave
structures. The small U/V cases (< 2.0) are targets of this kind of experiments. Since the waves at
nozzle eXit can be comparatively Visible in the small U/V case, the statistic characteristics obtained
through the time histories of the breakup length can be examined by the use of the information of
waves around the nozzle eXit. Concretely, the images including several times breakups are taken at the
speciﬁed time intervals during a long-period and single inj eotion experiment.

As noted above, almost all of our experimental setup can be directly applied to the experiments on
188. There is a possibility that the droplets scattering from the base part of the test section prevents
from obtaining images of liquid jet during such long-period microgravity experiments. One of
solutions for such a problem is the use of sponge blocks with high water-absorption performance.
Considering the necessity to reduce experimental instruments and to avoid excess procedures,
automatic water-absorption by sponge blocks can be one candidate. The behaVior of the scattering
droplets and water-absorption performance of sponge blocks were investigated through microgravity
experiments by the use of parabolic ﬂights. PVA sponge blocks made by AION with approximately 80
um pores were adopted and installed at the bottom of the test section. Typical ﬁgures around the
sponge block are shown in ﬁgure 14. Large droplets scattering from the blocks were not observed. The
images obtained approximately 16 s after the beginning of liquid injection are shown in ﬁgure 15.
Vitiation due to the ﬁne droplets near the base part is observed only in the high-speed injection case.
Such contamination of the test section can be avoided by making a hole on the sponge block. Water-
absorption capacity of PVA sponge block during the long-period experiments was conﬁrmed through
other normalgraVity experiments. Of course, other methods can be used for collection of water and

‘-"" 9H3 / 5119* I
a — 1.03m
LIN = 2.115 .5. ﬂ _ m”! t .t. Er? 15, I
ﬁlial'i/ 'u?‘ﬁal
Figure 14. Typical successive images around surface of a sponge block located at the bottom of the
test section.
a—l.03t111n, Ln— 30mm - - - +7 —
“—1-04 BE UN — 4-02
.1; '-' ' n—n ‘9 '—'.—‘- “'3 '3 J3 D 1:: numb.
I *- .| I 1; ' ' I I
a= D.S‘El'tmn, Ln = 30111111
u—lﬂﬂ EH UN — 15.11 1.1.1151-
"" ' -;.L '5?!
1n 1..» ._ - W151:-
I. -31.. .- jLIFJI... r 1| 1' hull I'“ - u} ft. _. . :WF! :-
Figure 15. Images indicating scattering of ﬁne droplets from a sponge block.
13

"
"15","International Symposium on Physical Sciences in Space IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 327 (2011) 012042 doi:10.1088/1742—6596/327/1/012042
ﬁnal solution is currently under consideration.
6. Conclusion
Breakup process of a liquid j et issued from a circular nozzle, Which has been attributed to “some kind
of disturbance existing in nature and inside of a nozzle”, has been investigated through a neW breakup
theory. The spontaneous breakup occurs by the short-wave mode as long as the tip of the liquid jet
eXists. The steady breakup length is determined only by the short-wave mode if the ease of U/V< 1.58.
If U/V exceeds 1.58, the breakup by the short-wave mode cannot ﬁx the breakup length and the
unstable waves have important roles for the realization of the steady breakup length. Even in such a
case, the main determinant for the liquid breakup is the capillary waves emanated from the liquid tip
after each breakup. The reproduction and the reﬂection of the capillary waves at the nozzle eXit can
generate the unstable waves With the same amplitude as that of the capillary waves. A self—elosed
breakup cycle is established by the wave structures. From normalgraVity experiments, it was found
that the breakup length is classiﬁed into the LDB and the SDB modes. The breakup length in the LDB
mode is occupied by the long relaxation region. While the separation bubbles or turbulence formed
inside of the nozzle causes the turbulent SDB mode, the uniform velocity distribution due to the
coupling of the ﬂow ﬁelds inside and outside the nozzle is thought to be necessary for the realization
of the laminar SDB mode. Although gravitational acceleration is inherently negligible for turbulent
atomization, it can generate the unstable waves from the capillary waves and change the length of the
relaxation region in normalgravity experiments. This is Why microgravity experiments are desirable
for establishing a comprehensive breakup theory. In addition, the effect of time histories of the waves
on the breakup of liquid jet and the appearance of the two-valueness of the breakup length is suggested
from our breakup theory. In order to investigate such unclear points, the microgravity experiments on
ISS Which can provide long-period microgravity environments are currently projected. The
experimental setup of our previous experiments is directly applicable to such experiments and thus the
high feasibility of such experiments is expected.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Grant-in Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (A) from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Teehnology-Japan, and carried out as a part of “preparation
and implementation of researches utilizing Kibo’ carried out by J apan Space Forum under the contract
With J apan Aerospace Exploration Agency.
References
[1] Umemura A and Wakashima Y 2002 Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 633.
[2] Raylengh L 1878 Proc. Land. Math.4 4.
[3] Arthur M S and SLEICHER C A 1975 68 477.
[4] Fenn R W and Middleman S 1969 AIChE J.15 379.
[5] LerouX S, Dumouchel C. and LedouX M. 1997 Int. J. Fluid Mech. Res. 24 428.
[6] Umemura A 2011 Phys. Rev. E 83 04637.
[7] Braekbill J U, Kothe D B and Zemaeh C 1992 J. Comput. Phys. 100 335.
[8] Shinjo J and Umemura A 2010 Int. J. Multiphase F low 36 513.
[9] Umemura A 2008 J.Jpn. SOC. Microgravity App]. 25 50.
[10] Kawanabe S 2010 Master’s thesis, Department of Aeroengineering, Nagoya Univeristy.
[11] Amagai K 2000 Atomization 9 261.
[12] Grant R P and Middleman S 1966 AIChE J.15 669.
[13] Phinney R E 1972 AIChEJ.18 432.

14

"
