"","x"
"1","FE...» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com _——_——_
//._ ’ ,.
5‘” ‘v"" ' ' [Milli
@131 ScuenceDIrect lllWﬁ‘ﬁﬂllll 111111111311
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 m
www.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
REVIEW
Space stat10ns for the United States: An idea whose t1me has
come—and gone?
Roger D. Launius
National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, PO. Box 37012, NASM Room 3556, MRC 31], Washington, DC 20013-7012, USA
Received 15 January 2008; received in revised form 8 February 2008; accepted 20 February 2008
Abstract
While the ﬁrst space station in American culture was described in an 1869 work of ﬁction in the Atlantic Monthly, in the
twentieth century the idea proliferated through all cultures as the sine qua non enabling technology for space exploration. In
the latter part of the 1960s many in the leadership of NASA realized that the kind of resources that had been made available
for the sprint to the Moon that was Project Apollo would not be repeated. They turned to advocating the development of major
projects that would create for the United States a permanent infrastructure in space, and eventually the capability to leave Earth
permanently. This involved as its centerpieces the development of an orbital workshop leading to a space station, and a reusable
vehicle to transport people and cargo to and from Earth orbit with a modicum of efﬁciency. This found realization through the
building of the International Space Station (ISS) at the end of the century. But even as ISS became a reality, on February 1,
2003, its role was made tenuous by the loss of the Columbia space shuttle and the grounding of the ﬂeet. On J anuary 14, 2004,
moreover, President George W. Bush announced a reorientation of NASA’s programs to emphasize a return to the Moon and a
human expedition to Mars. In that context, he advocated the retirement of the Space Shuttle by 2010 and the ending Of US.
involvement in ISS before 2020. Suddenly, the space station had become irrelevant to American efforts in space. The history of
space stations and their development over time, and what it portends for the future of space policy, is the subject of this essay.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Keywords: Space stations; NASA; Space program; International space station; Mir; Skylab; Space shuttle
Contents
1. The attraction ofaspace station 540
2.WernhervonBraun/Collier’s 1952 concept 540
3. 2001: ASpace Odyssey—thehighpoint ofvonBraun’s space station 541
4. Skylab: apreliminary space station 543
5. The questforafull—ﬂedged space station 543
6. InternationalSpace Station origins 545
7. The shuttle/Mirprogram 546
9. Reconsidering therationaleforthe space station 551
10. Conclusmn 552
References 553
E-mail address: launiusr@si.edu.
0094—5765/$ — see front matter Published by Elsevier Ltd.
dOi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2008.02.014

"
"2","540 R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
1. The attraction of a space station - I II ,, at; 9*” -. ‘ $13, ”mi I
From Virtually the beginning of the twentieth cen— ‘ » , ‘ ﬁgﬁtgﬁ’: ﬁt
tury, those interested in the human exploration of space ' '4 ‘ i ., ‘3‘:
have Viewed as central to that endeavor the building of I . . - _ ""7-1 .. -'-. ~
a massive Earth orbital space station that would serve as ‘I ' . . ' - 1‘ ‘
the jumping off point to the Moon and the planets. Al— I ' . ‘ . '. '
ways, space exploration enthusiasts believed, a perma— . ' é;
nently occupied space station was a necessary outpost in - . . - ,t ‘3;
the new frontier of space. The more technically minded i: I . g ;:
recognized that once humans had achieved Earth or— ‘ ' ‘ .- 711*. ”“2"" 3% 1“»
bit about 200 miles up, the presumed location of any . *1 2"" $1354.“: .
space station, the vast majority of the atmosphere and ﬂ ‘ _— 153‘ ' . .
the gravity well had been conquered and that persons , t 1 1’?
were now about halfway to anywhere they might want I . I , e, 7
to go. ’ I 3 I '1 I
As early as 1869 Edward Everett Hale, a New Eng— ”1 , ‘1 f: A w .. i "" ”‘ -
land writer and social critic, published a short story in 'k' ( . i \‘
the Atlantic Monthly entitled “The Brick Moon.” The ”s. . T —
ﬁrst known proposal for an orbital satellite around the . . _ .- I -
Earth, Hale described how a satellite in polar orbit could . .. I ‘ - ’
be used as a navigational aid to ocean—going vessels. “f“ ‘ , I -
When the heroes of the story substitute a brick moon ‘ .» ‘
for this ring—brick because it could withstand ﬁre—it 7
iS hurled into orbit 5000 miles above the Earth. An aC— Image 1. Hermann Noordung (1892—1929) wrote Das Problem der
Cident S ends the brick moon Off prematurely, however, Befahrung des WeltrauIIns (Berlin: Richard Carl Schmidt and Co.,
. . 1929), one of the class1c early works about spaceﬂlght. Its author,
Whlle 37 construction workers and Other p 60p 16 were whose real name was Herman Potocnik, was an obscure engineer in
aboard it- In contra“ to What is now known 31301“ the the Austrian army who, inspired by the work of Hermann Oberth,
vacuum Of space, these people lived on the outer part prepared the ﬁrst detailed technical designs of a space station. Here
0f the brick moon, raised fOOd, and enjoyed an almost we see Noordung’s depiction of the complete space station with its
utopian eXisten C e [1]- three units, seen through the door of a space ship. In the IdistanceI is
Russian schoolteacher Konstantin E. Tsiolkovskiy the Earth, some 2o,000 mlles away. In Noordung’s 1929 111ustrat1Ion
. . . . . . the statlon hovers 1n geosynchronous orbit on the meridian of Berlin,
also IstlglleCIll thipiSSflIbllltill 0]: 68131311811111; £1 space ‘Staf; approximately above the southern tip of Cameroon (NASA photo).
tion in art or it e oret e eginning o t e twentiet
century. Tsiolkovskiy even discussed the feasibility
of building a dramatic wheeled space station that ro— in World War II, argued for an integrated space plan
tated slowly to approximate gravity with centrifugal centered upon human exploration of the solar system
force [2]. During the 1920s Romanian—German space and involving these basic ingredients accomplished in
ﬂight theorist Hermann Oberth and Solvenian engineer this order:
Hermann Noordung both elaborated on the concept
of the orbital space station as a base for voyages into 1. robotic Earth orbital satellites (at ﬁrst a hesitant step
space. In Noordung’s case, the technical attributes but embraced with Explorer 1);
of a space station to support planetary exploration 2. human Earth orbital ﬂights;
took up the bulk of his 1929 book, DaS Pmblem 3, winged reusable spacecraft;
der Befahmng des Weltraums (The Problem of Space 4. permanently inhabited space station;
Travel) [3]. 5. human lunar exploration;
6. human expeditions to Mars.
2. Wernher von BraurﬂCollier’s 1952 concept
von Braun espoused these ideas in a series of important
In the United States during the 1950s, German émigré Collier’s articles over a two—year period in the early
Wernher von Braun, the leader of the rocket team that 1950s, each with striking images by some of the best
had developed the V—2 ballistic missile for Germany artists of the era (Images 1—10 ) [4].

"
"3","R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 541
4 “/1"": '
.’ V“ ‘ V . ""' 5
. \x h I x I V
‘ A ‘ ’ ."" l. I «
7 ‘ .- ‘> 1/ - ./’ _ x - A . \ - t c 7
. ' K; \ 6' -' ‘ x ' ‘ - ~ - .. A '1‘ Vﬂ\-»f’t‘;i-‘u-\ J
« .~. g . ._._ ~ ' 8- »~ *2 2s .- . 1.8. 1 at a; 36
‘- :- .'. ; u a , j , , V s_xgo' / *1. \.f.. g} ‘69 8‘
_l' ,. , N ‘_ ‘, NUT —V. ‘3\ h‘%;@_., _""S%'.ﬂ1ﬂ»d
:‘TM. . ' t 811'} ,/ :‘v’ . . ~ \ » ‘ "" — e «v :1 “‘2’ '
. ' . . 5 ' 3- 1 ‘a 1"" 1 151.1 s ""
, ' l P '1 _.,. ' 9 ' ' §‘ . “‘ V ”x”. , ‘33 i
sit ‘ -. ‘ ~ >+'xx“\., .
_ ""a J g! a . vx§
| 8- ; «8 423, v - 3’8 \‘\‘.-~.. :‘ » \\,.
‘ ,(i ‘*"" 9 ‘_ \\\x , 1; \1.’
\ '.' . - *‘- 3' x1; ‘ ~~_\ ‘- “ ‘ ‘1‘ 3"" ~ \\ ‘\\ N ‘
ll .. l . 5-... - -~ ‘_ _-\\\¢ -\ \-
‘_ ‘l 'u 5 .. W ""* 8 7‘ l - §’ \ \ \. \\ \ \‘\'
t -‘ -' . ' ‘l‘ \ ‘ ‘44 \‘ - . .__‘ ‘1‘ .‘ . \ \\._ k. \ \
Image 2. The most unusual, intriguing, and perhaps uniquely Viable Image 3. The central question about space stations involved solv—
concept fOI‘ a space station was 0116 that inﬂated after reaching ing the problem of generating enough electrical power to meet the
Earth orbit. The design for this 24—ft two—person space station came needs of the vehicle. Only two options emerged for accomplish—
from the Goodyear Aircraft Corporation in 1961 and ground tests ing this task over the long term, solar power and nuclear power.
proceeded for several years thereafter without anything ﬂightworthy One was enormously dangerous and the other yielded only a small
being built. In the 1990s inﬂatables returned to the space engineering amount of wattage. With additional research both could be im—
vocabulary and several concepts are presently on the drawing board. proved. In this illustration a nuclear SNAP—8 reactor, located at the
One inﬂatable concept has been built and launched by Bigelow end of a boom away from the habitat, powers the space station.
Aerospace (NASA photo, nos. MiSC #-12A). This Marshall—McDonnell Douglas approach envisioned the use of
two common modules as the core conﬁguration of a 12—man space
station. Each common module was 33ft in diameter and 40ft in
. . . . length and provided the building blocks, not only for the space sta—
In part because Of thlS pers1stentV1s1on Of human (168- tion, but also for a 50—man space base. Coupled together, the two
tiny to explore the Solar System and the Central role of modules would form a four—deck facility: two decks for laborato—
a space station in facilitating this goal, studies Of space ties and two decks for operations and 11V1ng quarters. Zero—grav1ty
. . . would be the normal mode of operation, although the station would
station conﬁgurations had been an important part of . . . .. . .
. . . . have an art1ﬁc1a1—grav1ty capability. This general—purpose orbital fa—
NASA planning In the 19605: NASA SClenUStS and .en' cility was to provide wide—ranging research capabilities. The design
gineers pressed for these studies because a space station of the facility was driven by the need to accommodate a broad spec-
met the needs of the agency for an orbital laboratory, trum of activities in support of astronomy, astrophysics, aerospace
observatory, industrial plant, launching platform, and medicine, biology, materials processing, space physics, and space
. f ' A A h . — ' 2 .
dry—dock. The station, however, was forced ﬁrst to the manu aetunng (N S p Oto’ no 63 Space Statlon 0)
bottom of the priority heap in 1961 with the Kennedy
decision to land an American on the Moon by the end , ﬂ b1 , ff 1 ,
of the decade. With that mandate, there was no time to in bat: e p asiagewayshcoming :ha‘genta a noln—rgtating
develop a space station in spite of the fact that Virtually T1111 ’ t us ma mg 3i? 61:“ 8:11;) uf—anb—spo 16 68151;
everyone in NASA recognized its use for exploration , e SUSICtUI‘C woSu 86V epkoy ajter eing aunc e
b ey on d E arth orbit. 11H: or 1t atopa atu? droe Ielt [f ]. NASA
Even so, some studies continued. The most unusual, space Stifnzur ﬁceb as t e orenliost. h 1p ro—
intriguing, and perhaps uniquely Viable concept for a TEES 61611 W 1(6 p O 10 ecanie a reabltg 1n t e atter
space station was one that inﬂated after reaching Earth hS, 1,“ £001 SCVW uglulsua turns 6 ﬁre e?erlglﬁg
orbit. The design for a 24—ft two—person space station as t epﬂnmp a p “26“ O t e agency at t 6 en 0 t 6
came from the Goodyear Aircraft Corporation in 1961 twentiet century [ ]'
and ground tests proceeded for several years thereafter
without anything ﬂight worthy being built. In the 1990s 3. 2001: A Space Odyssey—the high point of von
inﬂatables returned to the space engineering vocabu— Braun’s space station
lary and several concepts are presently on the draw—
ing board. In a similar vein, Langley Research Center’s The ﬁlm 2001: A Space Odyssey, released by director
Rene Berglund came up with a concept to put together Stanley Kubrick in 1968, set a high mark for depicting
a series of siX rigid modules that were connected by a wheel—like space station on the von Braun model.

"
"4","542 R.D. Launius / Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
Kubrick depicted a human race moving outward into the enterprises carrying out many of the functions seen in
solar system, and the station served fundamentally as the ﬁlm’s ﬁrst segments. The shuttle to the space sta—
base camp to the stars. A great space station orbited the tion is ﬂown by Pan American, a Hilton hotel is located
Earth, serviced by a reusable, Winged spacecraft traV— 0n the station, and the station’s communications is pro—
eling from the globe’s surface. Activities in low—Earth Vided by AT&T [7].
orbit had become routine in this ﬁlm, With commercial Kubrick’s ﬁlm was, from start to ﬁnish a special—
effects masterpiece, especially for the pre—computer
graphics era of ﬁlmmaking. Perhaps its most scintillat—
, SKYLAB CLUSTER ing segment involved the docking of a Winged space
rogmﬁioh’ggnfﬁugfﬁif(?'fi'tsssa cum mm) ‘ ‘ 5°“ “N“ shuttle With the gigantic rotating Wheeled space station.
‘ .-, I 25 ‘ ‘EX RIMENIS . , . . . .
xfgjrgggvmgfum1:233 (223$.52‘)f}""?’3§)mm) ‘ I‘M':ommm Kubrick s depiction of this space station expressed
1, ,. ' :3“? well the dream of a base camp to the stars. With its
_‘ 1,2 4/31 1% twin hubs still under construction, Kubrick’s station
,5» ‘ 7 . gm m 1 4% . . . .
""I’ 1‘ 1‘ ,. 143%; f” y g measured an astounding 900 ft across as it spun in its
“ ($73”; --::/ ea xﬁgsﬁgw ~ orbit 200 miles above the Earth. It held an international
APOLLO mascovs MOUNT @‘ <?'{ & \ij """" WA” “00“ . .
ti $52.3y-6 {6 g ' $31M,"" crew of seientists, bureaucrats, and passengers on the
Mum“ °“K'NGADAP'ER;:/<7EQ7: ' WM"" way to and from the Moon [8].
COMMAND&SERVICEAI _ ~"" ' s .‘E' 1/ * -ggrsiimwmr ' ’ ' '
MODULE 1,“ __ ' . a . The impact of von Braun s station, espe01a11y as
v X: AIRLOCK MODULE - SATURN . . .
-. “s: WORKSHOP Kubrick presented it, has been nothing short of as—
tounding. John Hodge, the leader of NASA’s Space
. msrmmmooom Station Task Force that worked to design a space sta—
_ _ _ _ _ tion in the 1980s, told Congress in 1983 that “I think
Image 4. This 111ustrat10n shows general characterlstlcs 0f the Skylab . . . .
. . . if you ask the public at large, and quite p0ss1b1y most
Wlth callouts 0f 1ts major components. In an early effort to extend , , ,
the use of Apollo for further applications, NASA established the Of the people Wlthm NASA What a space Statlon was’
Apollo Applications Program (AAP) in August of 1965 (NASA they would thlnk 111 terms Of the m0V1e that came out
Photo, 110. MSFC-0101537). 15 or 20 years ago.” He added that they expected a
k 94""” V. (VI: ‘ —'5*15.""’ 3 . ; I ‘
., Jr - 7 . . V .-. -,d— -.
""V' - O I ’ ._'P V , - . . V‘ ‘1 g 5-124""
-_o\g;lp. I r ‘ 7. ~_ . D - 'ﬂJ. . 0 ~ ,- -'.
~""""""’""‘—:-.P. -. V. "" ‘ , - .- . .‘-. I ‘ ‘1 . A, I O
\r;_\ , - , _ - . ._ m f . 4 .
/. » 1 .
N M _. 4:1”?- .1 ,r/ A"" .* ‘3‘ g ‘ ui' ‘
. “A ‘ ‘c I l- L 74—— . v
5* 1 ‘3' ' ‘ _ . ‘ i ’ ~/ ——~"" ~
1: ,, ', 8. r “a F ‘ '59? -'""“ _~. 0
- ', x-“ ' ' i ' “ ‘5 ’
j 1“ iI1 . I 1 i ‘
' ~ . (i ‘ b ' .
‘ . . "" y... ‘ ﬂ \ ' . t \‘ I 1 1 l ‘
#7-: i.‘ $1 l; . '5 ?’f | E- ' . a
. ,A ‘ %.+ 1 T“ ‘I ""y: ‘ _,' ‘ 19% ;) c
' Q; 3 1; ~ ’ I 1 - ﬂ 1 ‘ ..
\ , “'- ‘ . a x '9
3 ' f~ ‘ ~' I ‘ ‘
. . . a .. I \ .
r . .
rut , ~- ‘ is- J, . w W
J- - ‘ - H :- . ""
.4 f , Q . \L .
0 - .75— _ ‘ “ ‘( i I.
~45"" .‘. I ' ' h 1' :~
. l‘- I l, I ‘nn‘ . I '.
Image 5. The zero—G shower on Skylab taxed the design capabilities. Here Jack R. Lousrna, the Skylab 3 pilot takes a hot bath in the crew
quarters of the orbital workshop in 1974 (NASA photo, n0. SL3—108—1295).

"
"5","R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 543
space station to consist of “a very large rotating wheel under microgravity conditions exceeded the combined
with 100 people on it and artiﬁcial gravity” [9]. totals of all of the world’s previous space ﬂights up to

Writing for the popular Science 83 magazine, that time. NASA was also delighted with the scientiﬁc
Mitchell Waldrop felt it necessary to explain why any knowledge gained about long—duration space ﬂight dur—
real space station would not look like the von Braun ing the Skylab program despite the workshop’s early
version. He observed that the actual station “will look and reoccurring mechanical difﬁculties. It was the site
more like something a child would build with an Erec— of nearly 300 scientiﬁc and technical experiments.
tor set.” It would not resemble a wheel, it would not Following the ﬁnal occupied phase of the Skylab mis—
rotate, and it would not soar very high. “2001 it’s not,” sion, ground controllers performed some engineering
Waldrop explained [10]. tests of certain Skylab systems, positioned Skylab into

a stable attitude, and shut down its systems. It was eX—
4. Skylab: a preliminary space station pected that Skylab would remain in orbit 8—10 years, by
which time NASA might be able to reactivate it. In the

Without clear presidential leadership in the late fall of 1977, however, agency ofﬁcials determined that
1960s, NASA began to forge ahead on its own with Skylab had entered a rapidly decaying orbit—resulting
whatever plans it could get approved for a continuation from greater than predicted solar actiVity—and that it
of U.S. space ﬂight in the 1970s. One of these, and a would reenter the Earth’s atmosphere within two years.
very important one, used Apollo technology to realize They steered the orbital workshop as best they could
at least partially the longstanding dream of a space so that debris from reentry would fall over oceans and
station. What NASA built was a relatively small orbital unpopulated areas of the planet.
space platform, called Skylab, which could be tended On July 11, 1979, Skylab ﬁnally impacted the Earth’s
by astronauts. It would be, NASA ofﬁcials hoped, the surface. The debris dispersion area stretched from the
precursor of a real space station [11]. Southeastern Indian Ocean across a sparsely populated

The 100—ton Skylab I orbital workshop was launched section of Western Australia. NASA took criticism for
into orbit on May 15, 1973, the last use of the giant this development, ranging from the sale of hardhats as
Saturn V launch vehicle. Almost immediately, tech— “Skylab Survival Kits” to serious questions about the
nical problems developed due to Vibrations during propriety of space ﬂight altogether if people were likely
lift—off. Sixty—three seconds after launch, the meteoroid to be killed by falling objects. In reality, while NASA
shield—designed also to shade Skylab’s workshop took sufﬁcient precautions so that no one was injured,
from the Sun’s rays—ripped off, taking with it one of its leaders had learned that the agency could never again
the Spacecraft’s two solar panels, and another piece allow a situation in which large chunks of orbital debris
wrapped around the other panel to keep it from properly had a chance of reaching the Earth’s surface. It was an
deploying. Because of this, Skylab 2, the ﬁrst mission inauspicious ending to the ﬁrst American space station,
with astronauts, launched on May 25, 1973, with as— not one that its originators had envisioned, but it had
tronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Paul J. Weitz, and Joseph opened some doors Of understanding and had whetted
P. Kerwin, to undertake substantial repairs requiring the appetite of NASA leaders for a full—ﬂedged space
extravehicular activity (EVA). station.

In orbit the crew conducted solar astronomy and Earth
resources experiments, medical studies, and ﬁve student 5. The quest for a full-ﬂedged space station
experiments. This ﬁrst crew made 404 orbits and car—
ried out experiments for 392 h, in the process making With Skylab gone from the scene after 1979, and com—
three EVAs totaling 6h and 20min. The ﬁrst group of ing on line of the Space Shuttle as a system in 1981,
astronauts returned to Earth on June 22, 1973, and two NASA returned to its quest for a real space station as
other Skylab missions followed. The ﬁrst of these, Sky- a site of orbital research and a jumping off point to the
lab 3, was launched using Apollo hardware on July 23, planets during the early 1980s. There had been stud—
1973, and its mission lasted 59 days. Skylab 4, the last ies of space stations made throughout the 1970s. One
mission on the workshop was launched on November adventurous 1977 approach using Space Shuttle hard—
16, 1973, and remained in orbit for 84 days. ware proposed a space spider concept for unwinding a

During the three missions, a total of three Apollo solar array from the spent main fuel tank of the Space
crews had occupied the Skylab workshop for a total of Shuttle. The Space Spider would be capable of form—
171 days and 13h. In Skylab, both the total hours in ing and assembling a structure in one integrated opera—
space and the total hours spent in performance of EVA tion. With such an unwinding of a solar array, the main

"
"6","544 R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
engine tank could then become a control center for
space operations, a crew habitat for Space Shuttle as—
tronauts, and a focal point for space operations, includ— \
ing missions to the Moon and Mars. At the same time, _
in a measure of political acumen not seen often preVi— \\ ‘- k‘ \
ously, NASA administrator James M. Beggs persuaded \\ _ f ' . ""K
President Ronald Reagan, against the wishes of many ‘3: '2,
presidential advisors, to endorse the building of a per—
manently occupied space station [12]. \ k \ _
In a “Kennedyesque” moment in 1984, Reagan de— . ﬂ ' ;\ ‘\
Clared that “America has always been greatest when we , . .,, 1'; A ’ \
dared to be great. We can reach for greatness again. We "" K‘;
can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and work— 0 ” ,~ X
ing in space for peaceful, economic, and scientiﬁc gain. ('1 . - ‘dﬁ . J
Tonight I am directing NASA to develop a permanently ,\~ ‘ - &
manned space station and to do it within a decade” [13]. Rx ‘ , ./ v-i
In 1985 the space agency came forward with designs .. _._ \ “ﬁn V]
for an $8 billion dual—keel space station conﬁguration, ”\a L x 1‘:- _
to which were attached a large solar power plant and t’ \
several modules for microgravity experimentation, life ,\ _
science, technical activities, and habitation. This station . r ""’ /“ """"'
also had the capacity for signiﬁcant eXpansion through . V, I 4” 7' ' . I
the addition of other modules [14]. , ,v’. ,9 . ‘ """"‘
From the outset, both the Reagan administration and 7 ,2 ” I ‘ I i L
NASA intCndCd Space StatiOIl F 7” 66610171, 38 it WaS CEIHCd, Image 6. Space Station Freedom concepts early hit on two major
to be an international program, Although a range of 111— designs. The ﬁrst of these was the “dual keel” design. The second
ternational cooperative activities had been carried out major deSigP for Space Station Freedom was the “Power tower”
in the past—Spacelab, the Apollo—Soyuz Test Project, coneept depleted here. Ultlmately selected as the reference conﬁg—
, , , uratlon by NASA 1n 1985, the power tower mounted solar arrays
and SClenUﬁC data exchange—the Statlon Offered an Op— at the top of the trusses and modules and most experiments at the
portunity for a truly integrated effort. The inclusion of bottom (NAS A photo, n0. 85—HC—244).
international partners, many now with their own rapidly
developing space ﬂight capabilities, could enhance the
effort. In addition, every partnership brought greater 16— to dictate solutions, and to control schedules and other
gitimacy to the overall program and might help to in- factors. Partnership, furthermore, was not a synonym
sulate it from drastic budgetary and political Changes. for contractor management, something agency leaders
Inciting an international incident because of a change understood very well, and NASA was not very accept—
to the station was something neither U.S. diplomats nor ing of full—partners unless they were essentially silent
politicians relished, nor that fact, it was thought, could or at least deferential. Such an attitude militated against
help stabilize funding, schedule, or other factors that signiﬁcant international cooperation.
might otherwise be changed in response to short—term In addition to this concern, some technologists eX—
political needs [15]. pressed fear that bringing Europeans into the project re—
NASA leaders understood these positive factors, but ally meant giving foreign nations technical knowledge
recognized that international partners would also dilute that only the US. held. No other nation could build a
their authority to execute the program as they saw ﬁt. space station on a par with Freedom, and only a hand—
Throughout its history the space agency had never been ful had a genuine launch capability. So many govern—
Very willing to deal with partners, either domestic or ment ofﬁcials questioned the advisability of reducing
international, as co—equals. It has tended to see them America’s technological lead. The control of technol—
more as a hindrance than help, especially when they ogy transfer in the international arena was an especially
might get in the way of the “critical path” toward any important issue to be considered [16].
technological goal. Assigning an essentially equal part— In spite of these concerns, NASA leaders pressed for—
ner responsibility for the development of a critical sub— ward with international agreements among 13 nations
system meant giving up the power to make changes, to take part in the Space Station Freedom program.

"
"7","R.D. Launius / Acta Astronautica 62 (2008 ) 539—555 545
J apan, Canada, and the nations pooling their resources Viability. It was a seemingly endless Circle, and polit—
in the European Space Agency (ESA) agreed in the ical wits wondered when the dog would wise up and
spring of 1985 to participate. Canada, for instance, de— stop Chasing its tail. Some leaders suggested that the
Cided to build a remote servicing system. Building on its nation, NASA, and the overall space exploration effort
Spacelab experience, ESA agreed to build an attached would be better off if the space station program were
pressurized science module and an astronaut—tended terminated. Then, after a few years had passed and ad—
free—ﬂyer. J apan’s contribution was the development and ditional study and planning had been completed, NASA
commercial use of an experiment module for materials could come forward with a more Viable effort [21].
processing, life sciences, and technological develop— That Congress did not terminate the program was
ment. These separate components, with their “plug—in” in part because of the desperate economic situation in
capacity, eased somewhat the overall management (and the aerospace industry—a result of an overall reces—
congressional) concerns about unwanted technology sion and of military demobilization after the collapse
transfer [17]. of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War—and

Almost from the outset, the Space Station Freedom the fact that by 1992 the project had spawned an esti—
program was controversial. Most of the debate centered mated 75,000 jobs in 39 states, most of which were key
on its costs versus its beneﬁts. One NASA ofﬁcial re— states such as California, Alabama, Texas, and Mary—
membered that “I reached the scream level at about land. Politicians were hesitant to kill the station outright
$9 billion,” referring to how much U.S. politicians ap— because of these jobs, but neither were they willing to
peared willing to spend on the station [18]. As a re— fund it at the level required to make it a truly Viable
sult, NASA designed the project to ﬁt an $8 billion program. Barbara Mikulski (D—MD), chair of the Sen—
research and development funding proﬁle. For many ate Appropriations subcommittee that handled NASA’s
reasons, some of them associated with tough Washing— budget, summarized this position, “I truly believe that
ton politics, within ﬁve years the projected costs had in space station Freedom we are going to generate jobs
more than tripled and the station had become too eX— today and jobs tomorrow—jobs today in terms of the
pensive to fund fully in an environment in which the actual manufacturing of space station Freedom, but jobs
national debt had exploded in the 1980s [19]. tomorrow because of what we will learn” [22].

NASA pared away at the station budget, in the In the latter 1980s and early 1990s a parade of space
process eliminating functions that some of its con— station managers and NASA administrators, each of
stituencies wanted. This led to a rebellion among some them honest in their attempts to rescue the program,
former supporters. For instance, the space science com— wrestled with Freedom and lost. They faced on one
munity began complaining that the space station con— side politicians who demanded that the jobs aspect of
ﬁguration under development did not provide sufﬁcient the project—itself a major cause of the overall cost
experimental opportunity. Thomas M. Donahue, an at— growth—be maintained, and with station users on the
mospheric scientist from the University of Michigan other demanding that Freedom’s capabilities be main—
and Chair of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space tained, and with people on all sides demanding that
Science Board, commented in the mid—1980s that his costs be reduced. The incompatibility of these various
group “sees no scientiﬁc need for this space station demands ensured that station program management was
during the next twenty years.” He also suggested that a task not without difﬁculties. The NASA administrator
“if the decision to build a space station is political and beginning April 1, 1992, Daniel S. Goldin, was faced
social, we have no problem with that” alluding to the with a uniquely frustrating situation when these com—
thousands of jobs associated with it. “But don’t call it peting Claims were made ofﬁcial by the new president,
a scientiﬁc program” [20]. William J . Clinton, who told him in the spring of 1993

to restructure the space station program by reducing its
6. International Space Station origins budget, maximizing its scientiﬁc use, and ensuring that
aerospace industry jobs were not lost.

Redesigns of Space Station Freedom followed in After months of work, NASA came forward with
1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993, Each time the project three redesign options for the space station and on June
got smaller, less capable of accomplishing the broad 17, 1993, President Clinton decided to proceed with a
projects originally envisioned for it, less costly, and moderately priced, moderately capable station design.
more controversial. As costs were reduced, capabilities Near the same time, a dramatically changed interna—
also had to diminish, and increasingly political leaders tional situation allowed NASA to negotiate a land—
who had once supported the program questioned its mark decision to include Russia in the building of an

"
"8","546 KB. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
International Space Station (133). On November 7,
1993, the US. and Russia announced that they would
work together with the other international partners to 3%.
build a space station for the beneﬁt of all. Even so the q ,
14—nation 133 program remained a difﬁcult issue there— .- ' g -' ‘ ""
after and public policymakers wrestled with competing g, 1'
political agendas without consensus [23]. 0"" ./-V—"" }i@ ‘ I
7. The shuttle/Mir program 3”?) a S
«.N‘ \N /\\ ax ,/
1*.
After a few more months of discussion, NASA and ’35) ~. , ’
the Russian Space Agency decided to increase the extent 1"" ""
of their interactions, particularly with respect to ﬂights "" x 1%
of the U.S. Space Shuttle to dock with the Russian space ‘ "" .
station Mir. This cooperative effort led directly to the ’1 .—
February 1994 ﬂight of Cosmonaut Sergei KrikaleV on _ _ _
STS—60, alongside American astronauts in Space Shut— Image 7. The Space Shuttle Atlantls IS docked to the Mn space
statlon on July 4, 1995. Cosmonauts Anatolly Y. Solover and
dc D iscovery a and continued in February 1995, When Nikolai N. Budarin took this photograph while temporarily undocked
Discovery rendezvoused With Mir during the STS—63 frorn Mir in their Soyuz spacecraft during a ﬂy—around of the Russian
mission with Cosmonaut Vladimir Titov aboard. On Station (NASA Photo, “0- ST30715-072)-
March 16, 1995, U.S. Astronaut Norman E. Thagard,
M.D., lifted off in the Russian Soyuz—TM 21 spacecraft his fourth spaceﬂight, and Nikolai M. Budarin, making
with two Russian cosmonauts for a three—month stay on his ﬁrst ﬂight. Solover and Budarin were designated
Mir. One of the most signiﬁcant missions to take place as the Mir 19 crew and would remain aboard Mir when
in recent years, Thagard spent more than three months Atlantis undocked from the nine—year—old space station
on the Russian space station Mir. Thagard’s ﬂight set a and returned to Earth with the Mir—18 crew [25].
record for length of time in space by a U.S. astronaut. These docking missions aimed toward increasing in—
He broke the Skylab 4 crew record of 84 days set in ternational space ﬂight capabilities, and seemed to sig—
1973. He and the two Russian members of the Mir—18 nal a major alteration in the history of space exploration
crew, Vladimir Dezhurov and Gennadiy Strekalov, were [26]. With the launch of the ﬁrst two 188 components
also the ﬁrst Mir crew to return to Earth Via the Space in late 1998 it may well be that international competi—
Shuttle. tion has been replaced with cooperation as the primary
After undertaking a set of biomedical experiments reason behind huge expenditures for space operations.
on Mir during his stay, Thagard returned home on the As the dean of space policy analysts, J ohn M. Logsdon,
Space Shuttle Atlantis, STS—71, when it docked with concluded: “There is little doubt, then, that there will be
Mir in July 1995. “This ﬂight heralds a new era of an ISS, barring major catastrophes like another Shuttle
friendship and cooperation between our two countries,” accident or the rise to power of a Russian government
said NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin at the time. opposed to cooperation with the West.”
“It will lay the foundation for construction of an 188 Not everything on Mir was idyllic. A series of failures
later this decade” [24]. on Mir in 1997, including a major ﬁre and the ramming
This mission by Atlantis was the ﬁrst of nine shut— of the Spetkr module by a Progress resupply vessel,
tle/Mir link—ups between 1995 and 1998, including proved exceptionally taXing. At the same time, origi—
rendezvous, docking, and crew transfers. Robert L. nally designed to last ﬁve years, the station had been in
“Hoot” Gibson commanded the STS—71 crew, and his space for 11 years by this time and was showing signs
pilot was Charlie Precourt. Gibson was no novice to of age [27]. At the same time, everyone recognized that
spaceﬂight, having made four previous ﬂights, includ— Mir was a remarkable space station, performing its mis—
ing command of the STS—41B, STS—61C, and STS—47 sion remarkably well day in and day over the years. It
missions. The three STS—71 mission specialists aboard was a testament to the capability of the Russian space—
Atlantis—Ellen S. Baker, Bonnie Dunbar, and Gregory ﬂight community and its innovative nature.
J . Harbaugh—were also veterans of spaceﬂight, haVing In outward appearance, Mir has also been compared
undertaken 10 missions among them. Also aboard At— to a dragonﬂy with wings outstretched, an appropriate
lantis were Cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solover, making physical Characterization. NASA Astronaut Jerry

"
"9","R.D. Launius / Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 547
~ .‘ ~ , - , '~.. -‘ , //’ 5e. dimension of space missions and what it signals for
I _ V ‘ ‘ — 7; E ?'- ’ ' ’/ the future of spaceﬂight. Humans of several hundred
‘ ""5 1' ;, ’ - 1‘ I ‘ ’7 l ’. t ./ ' 1 years hence may well look back on this ﬂight as the

l.“ l t - ' 'J ' \ 15.3. I. f {:15 tangible evidence of the beginning of a cooperative
7 _' ﬂ} ,. T “ F , , _ =gg‘: “A * effort that was successful in creating a permanent
“K\ r g’ l 73;. ' ‘ “ 5"""" . “3 . 7 presence for Earthlings beyond the planet. It could,
., . n. ""33.5 . / . . grief"" -? "" i however, prove to be only a minor respite in the com—
’.‘ “r' "" 7| ‘~""‘¥ ‘ J petition among nations for economic and political
‘ I ’ . , - >&‘/' L . supremacy. The most important thing to remember
:11. . 0‘ if; ,1 V5; ‘~ ‘ :11 a about it, perhaps, is that the future is not yet written and
4- , . ‘ \_ , o ‘1): ‘1' that humans in the “here and now” have the unique op—
T I' - 4’ ""‘ ’ .' . .
.- - ' .. 4 ' \ . kl - portunity to support and contribute to the success of an
_ _ _ ISS, an outpost that will serve as a base camp to the stars
Image 8‘, M” W? ,always a messy place t9 hve and work Her? 1,8 and enable the move from this planet to a wide universe
the 1nter10r of Mn s Spektr module, showmg cosmonaut Vlad1m1r d
Dezhurov as he re—routes cable as part of the module’s activation beyon [3O]'
process in 1995 (NASA photo, no. 95—HC—454).
8. Building ISS
Linenger, who ﬂew on Mir in the mid—1990s, compared Beginning in 1993 NASA transformed the Space Sta—
the space station to tion F reedom program into the ISS. NASA leaders were
. . thereafter remarkabl successful in maintainin the o—
SlX school buses all hooked together. It was as if four . . . . y . . g p
. . . . litical coalition supporting the effort, and in late 1998
of the buses were driven into a four—way intersection . , . .
. . the station s ﬁrst elements were launched into orbit.
at the same time. They collided and became attached. . .
. Assembly of the station continued through 2002, and
All at right angles to each other, these four buses .
. . . NASA expected to complete it by 2006. The ﬁrst crew
made up the four Mir seience modules....Pr1roda and . .
. . . went aboard 1n the fall of 2000, and a total of nine crews
Spektr were relatively new additions....and looked . . .
. . . . . served aboard this station through October 2003. While
1t—each sporting shiny gold f01l, bleached—white so— . . .
there were enormous difﬁculties to be overcome in the
lar blankets, and unmarred thruster pods. Kvant—2 . . .
. . prOJect—Cost overruns, questions about the quality of
and Kr1stall...showed their age [28]. . . . .
seience to be undertaken, the role of C1V111ans who want
In 1995, at the time of the ﬁrst shuttle/Mir dock— to ﬂy, the need for the faeility—one may appropriately
ing mission, John Logsdon noted that it was a major conclude that the ISS effort has thus far been success—
suceess that the space station program had survived to ful, if only moderately so. This is true for three major
this point, because of international and domestic crit— reasons.
ics. “One hopes that all of this is behind us now,” he First, the fact that this station is being built at all by
added, “and that for the next seven years the 14—state a large international consortium is extraordinary, given
station partnership can focus all of its energies on ﬁ— the technical, ﬁnancial, and political obstacles involved.
nally putting to gether the orbital facility, without the di— The U.S. House of Representatives came within a single
version of continuing political arguments over its basic vote of canceling the entire effort in 1993. Space or—
existence and overall character.” He also commented: ganizations from a multitude of nations have struggled
. . . . . to overcome cultural differences on this enormousl
Even With all its difﬁculties and compromises, the . . y
. . . complex high—technology undertaklng. Second, the ISS
space station partnership still stands as the most . . .
. . . . . prov1des the most sophisticated model ever offered for
likely model for future human act1V1t1es in space. . . . .
. . . taX—ﬁnanced human act1V1t1es in space. One hundred
The complex multilateral mechanisms for managing .
. . . . . . years hence, humans may well look back on the build—
station operations and utilization w111 become a de . . . .
. mg of the station as the ﬁrst truly international endeavor
facto world space agency for human space ﬂight . . . .
. . . . among peaceful nations. No question, it is the most
operations, and planning for future m1ss1ons be— . . . .
. . . . sophisticated international effort ever attempted on the
yond Earth orbit are most likely to occur Within the . . . . .
. . . . space frontier. Third, the station could quite poss1bly
political framework of the station partnership [29]. . . . . . .
reV1ta11ze the spacefaring dream. Once functioning in
So what does this mean? The signiﬁcance seems space, the station may energize the development of
to rest on the international context of the this new private orbital laboratories. Such laboratories could

"
"10","548 R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
1997, with 188 assembly complete by June 2002. But
’ these rosy forecasts could not mitigate the reality of the
station’s complexity.
In April 1994, Canada shifted away from human
, 4 7' — 4 spaceﬂight and space robotics toward space commu—
., 7‘ ‘ . ‘ : r '- nications and Earth observation. As a consequence,
""i ‘4'...“‘2 4""‘.‘.‘~“ 1"" 4 4 NASA was forced to assume more responsibility (and
’ £5 -4 4 - .- 44 about $200 million more in costs) for the extravehic—
.1— .1: = ‘4. ' ..- .1? . f‘ . ' . "" ular robotics function previously the purview of the
’1’,"" 1 I w: - ..- 7 4 Canadian Space Agency (CSA). The program also eX—
"". 4""; '- - . ‘ perienced some shifting in requirements. For example,
- ‘ .1 -«_~~“’f<.\t ‘3 in June 1994 the Centrifuge Accommodation Module
“ ' ' (CAM), which had been a part of the Space Station
Image 9. View of the International Space Station (188) backdropped Freedom deSign bm was nOt identiﬁed SpeCiﬁcaHy as
by the blackness of space and Earth’s horizon. The 188 is moving integr 31 t0 the ISS, reehtered the program bUt WithOUt
away from the Space Shuttle Atlantis during STS—117. Atlantis and additional funding for it. The CAM was a much—
Expedition 15 crews concluded about eight days of cooperative work valued laboratory that would house an 8.2 ft diameter
3’33: af 3, tgéosiuffeiiiiiaﬁﬁ? ?.?fhiiﬁiﬁtfﬁaecéii: BE? 135: t centﬂfuge’ the assent?“ 00mm?“ of a larger 90mph""
the controls for the departure and ﬂyaround, which gave Atlantis’ ment Of researCh equipment dedlcated t0 graV1tational
crew a look at the station’s new expanded conﬁguration (NASA biology. It WOUId make POSSihle the use Of centrifugal
photo, no. Sll7-E-08045). force to simulate gravity ranging from almost zero to
twice that of Earth. It could also imitate Earth’s gravity
for comparison purposes while eliminating variables
travel in paths near the 188. The high—tech tenants in experiments and might even be used to simulate
of this orbital “Research Park” could well take ad— the gravity on the Moon 0r Mars for experiments that
vantage of the unique features of microgravity and would provide information useful for future space
achieve truly remarkable results. The 188 would permit travels. While the scientiﬁc community applauded the
research not possible on Earth in such areas as mate— addition, paying for the module proved a Challenge.
rials science, ﬂuid physics, combustion science, and As a result, NASA later negotiated with Japan for the
biotechnology [31]. CAM in return for paying the launch costs of J apanese
Beginning in 1994 the ISS proj ect took off in the new modules and astronauts [331-
direction mandated in the redesign that had taken place Even so, at the end of the century NASA’s in—
the year before. At that time NASA operated under an ternational partners—Canada, J apan, the BSA, and
annual ﬁscal year constraint of $2.1 billion per year for Russia—were expected to contribute the following key
188 funding and with a total projected cost of $17.4 elements to the 188, according to a NASA fact sheet:
billion. As an independent blue ribbon assessment on
188 Cost Assessment and Validation under Jay Chabrow 0 Canada is providing a 55—ft—long robotic arm to be
concluded in 1998, “NASA’s schedule and cost commit— used for assembly and maintenance tasks on the Space
ments were deﬁnitely success—oriented, especially eon— Station.
sidering the new realigned contracting approach with a 0 The ESA is building a pressurized laboratory to be
single Prime contractor and that the speciﬁcs of Russia’s launched on the Space Shuttle and logistics transport
involvement were just being deﬁnitized” [32]. In other vehicles to be launched on the Ariane 5 launch vehi—
words, NASA over—promised on what it could deliver Cle.
for the money expended and the schedule agreed upon. 0 Japan iS building a laboratory With an attached eX—
In addition,transitioning from Space Station Freedom posed exterior platform for experiments as well as
contracts to the 188 in 1994 presented some Challenges. logistics transport vehicles.
As it brought Russiainto the program, NASA undertook 0 Russia is providing two research modules; an early
in March 1994 a full systems design review, thereby living quarters called the Service Module with its own
effectively completing the redesign but establishing a life support and habitation systems; a science power
new baseline for the system. NASA and the partners platform of solar arrays that can supply about 20 kW
also devised an ISS assembly sequence in November of electrical power; logistics transport vehicles; and
28, 1994, reﬂecting an initial occupancy in November Soyuz spacecraft for crew return and transfer.

"
"11","R.D. Launius / Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 549
In addition, Brazil and Italy will be contributing some 6% I _, .. ', I. \\ I’Véo ,I’ . . . .3 If
equipment to the station through agreements with the ”7‘ r-. '13 L gay; '1, t.“ l. 7 P I = a
United States [34]. 8 i L): ,-'W""w“"""" 1 A "" ‘ E .
The ﬁrst two station components, the Zarya and Unity -7“ 1: 5? E]: 7 7'? . I c
.. . . ,‘ ,9 1"" 5m""; .
modules, were launched and JOlned together in orbit .523- tg’ ‘E ?EE ‘ , .3 g;
. , . - . ,5 H, .__... *l.
in late 1998. Several other components were nearing g v, ‘I ﬁg; 1 \ : EEF‘ , j
completion at factories and laboratories in the United \ "" 1F, , [.3 55?.
States and elsewhere. Orbital assembly of the 188 has ' El! _ U _ _, I 3 A
begun a new era of hands—on work in space, involving ,. ’ ' u g/ ‘ '1 . e: _
more spacewalks than ever before and a new generation ’ ‘73:» Q: :2"" . ‘ .I"" l‘ ’
of space robotics. The Space Shuttle and two types of f, '4‘ /’ “ l’ - .'
Russian launch vehicles will launch a total of 46 mis— - «~ 5 L-éy"" "" \ q ‘ . r}
sions to assemble the station, 3 of which—2 Shuttle mom» mmuw ' ' ‘ '
mISSIOnS and 1 RUSSIan launCh—.have been. completed Image 10. Astronaut Susan J. Helms, Expedition Two ﬂight engineer
as 0f MarCh 2002- Of the toad ﬂlghts, 37 W111 be Space in 2001, works at the Human Research Facility’s (HRF) Ultrasound
Shuttle ﬂights, and 9 will be Russian rockets. Flat Screen Display and Keyboard Module in the Destiny/U.S. Lab-
Through the Columbia accident in February 2003, 16 oratory (NASA photo, 110. 153002436699)-
ﬂights, which include 12 Space Shuttle missions, have
occurred in the ISS era. The ﬁrst of these was what
some have called the space tugboat, the FGB or Zarya
control module. Launched on November 20, 1998, by a assembly in December 1998, a 19—month hiatus fol—
Russian Proton Rocket from the Baikonur Cosmod- lowed before the Russians completed building the
rome, Kazakstan, Zarya was essentially an unpiloted Zvezda module. This module provided living quarters,
space “tugboat” that provided early propulsion, steering, life support, navigation, propulsion, communications,
and communications for the station’s ﬁrst months in or— and other functions for the early station. Without it,
bit. Later during assembly, Zarya became a station pas- crews could not remain on the 188 without the Space
sageway, docking port, and fueltank. Zarya was built by Shuttle being present. The Zvezda module was the
Russia under contract to the United States and is owned ﬁrst fully Russian station contribution and the core of
by the United States. This unit was followed quickly by the Russian station segment. Launched without a crew
the Unity connecting module taken aloft on Space Shut— aboard on July 25, 2000, Zvezda docked with the or—
tle mission STS—88. This was the ﬁrst of the 37 planned biting Zarya and Unity modules by remote control and
Space Shuttle ﬂights to assemble the station. Endeav- the gates were opened for 188 assembly. Its guidance
our’s crew rendezvoused with the already orbiting Zarya and propulsion systems took over those functions from
module and attached it to Unity on December 6, 1998. the Zarya module, which then became a passageway
When the Space Shuttle left, Unity and Zarya were in between the Unity and Zvezda modules [37].
an orbit 250 miles above Earth monitored continuously According to the original assembly sequence for the
by ﬂight controllers in Houston and Moscow [35]. redesigned space station in 1993, the Service Module
The third mission to 188 began on May 27, 1999, was supposed to have been in orbit in April 1998. How—
when the shuttle Discovery performed the ﬁrst dock— ever, a series of delays, caused mostly by Russia’s con—
ing with the 188 on May 29, 1999, as part of STS—96. tinued inability to generate the funds required to pay
Discovery’s crew unloaded almost 2 tons of supplies for the Service Module, pushed the launch date back by
and equipment for the station, including Clothing, lap- some two years. The Service Module’s launch was de—
top computers, water, spare parts, and other essentials. layed even further when the Proton rocket ﬂeet suffered
The crew also performed one EVA to install a U.S. (16- two launch failures. The failures were eventually traced
veloped spacewalkers’ “crane,” the base of a Russian- to manufacturing problems within upper stage rocket
developed “crane,” and other spacewalking tools on the engines and the system had to be redesigned. The con—
station’s exterior to await use by future station assem— tinued delays forced NASA to come up with several
bly crews. Discovery also ﬁred its thrusters to reboost contingency plans that were themselves also plagued
the station’s orbit and then undocked on June 3, 1999. by delays and cost overruns. The launch of Zvezda ﬁ—
Discovery landed back on Earth on June 6, 1999 [36]. nally paved the way for the launch of the U.S. labora—
While the launches 0f Zarya and Unity had been tory module, Destiny, and occupation by a permanent
good news, and some work had taken place after their crew [38],

"
"12","550 KB. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555

In anticipation of the ﬁrst crew boarding the 133, the Cost overruns on Boeing’s contract and the need for
space shuttle Atlantis, STS—101, made a second cargo an additional $430 million for NASA in FY1998 were
ﬂight beginning on September 8, 2000. Atlantis docked announced. NASA began transferring funds from other
with the ISS carrying supplies to be transferred to the NASA programs into space station construction. By the
interior. Atlantis ’5 crew performed a spacewalk to at— time of a major reView in the fall in 2001, the estimated
tach a telescoping boom to the Russian spacewalker’s U.S. portion of the ISS development stood at about $23
crane left on the station’s exterior during mission STS— billion [43].

96, as well as to conduct other assembly tasks. The sta— Most troubling, NASA managers kept silent until af—
tion remained unoccupied after Atlantis undocked [39]. ter the 2000 presidential election the fact that they were
Then prior to the Expedition One crew’s arrival at the tracking about $4 billion in cost growth for 188 for ﬁscal
ISS, STS—92 delivered the Z—l Truss, Pressurized Mat— years 2002—2006. This not only blew the legislated cap
ing Adapter 3, and four Control Moment Gyros in Oc— for the total cost, it also demolished the annual fund—
tober 2000. Astronauts performed four days of space— ing constraints. Since 1998 the estimated total cost to
walks to ﬁnish these connections [40]. build the 188 had grown every year by an average of

Then on October 31, 2000, a momentous occasion ar— $3.2 billion. The complete 188 was estimated in 2001
rived when the ﬁrst crew to occupy the ISS inaugurated to cost over $30 billion and would not be completed un—
a new era in space history. When American astronaut til 2006. Much of the U.S. hardware had already been
Bill Shepherd and Russian cosmonauts Yuri Gidzenko built, and more was in the process of completion. And
and Sergei KrikaleV lifted off in a Russian Soyuz space— some had already been assembled on orbit and made
craft from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan en operational. Many at NASA assumed by this time that,
route to their new home aboard the 188, it represented barring a catastrophe, the program was past its major
the last day in which there were no human beings in cost hurdles. Instead, NASA leaders found themselves
space. Shepherd, of Babylon, New York, was comman— with a set of additional costs that would be required
der of the three—person Expedition One crew, the ﬁrst of to complete the project. Most of these costs had been
several crews to live aboard the space station for periods pushed forward in time over the years and were now
of about four months. With cosmonauts Gidzenko and coming due. The CRV, habitat module, propulsion mod—
KrikaleV, Shepherd worked on assembly tasks as new ule, and the bulk of the science program intended for
elements, including the U.S. Laboratory, were added to 188, all fell under the budget aX. An air of crisis perme—
the orbiting outpost. They also conducted early science ated the 188 program all through the summer and fall of
experiments [41]. 2001 [44].

Entering 2003, the ISS assembly effort continued to Nonetheless, the international community building
be hampered by some of the same problems that it faced ISS continued their efforts. Until the Columbia acci—
in preceding years. While reasonable progress contin— dent of February 1, 2003, grounded the shuttle ﬂeet and
ued on the U.S. elements, there were many challenges ended the construction efforts until it could return to
ahead that resulted in increased cost and schedule ero— ﬂight, they ﬂew an additional 10 space shuttle and 12
sion. U.S. development problems continue to be over— Soyuz and Progress resupply missions to construct the
shadowed by Russian funding shortfalls and delays in its 188, resupply it, and swap out the crew of three person—
commitments; however, U.S. production delays and the nel. Access to the station, thereafter, came only through
incorporation of much needed multi—element integrated the use of the Russian Soyuz capsule, a reliable vehicle
testing has slowed down the construction process. There whose technology extended back to the 1960s. Because
also continued to be recurring problems such as late part of this limitation, the ISS crew was cut to two members
and component deliveries on ﬂight elements, similar to in May 2003, a skeleton workforce designed to keep the
those that plagued earlier ﬂight units. All of this was station operational as further deliberations took place,
exacerbated by the February 1, 2003 loss of Columbia, as the shuttle program underwent organizational reform
which grounded the shuttle ﬂeet until July 2005 [42]. and technical modiﬁcations, and as a policy debate over

Much of this concern revolve around cost. When the the long—term Viability of human spaceﬂight took place.
Freedom program became the ISS, NASA believed it Accordingly, Russia ﬂew 14 resupply and crew rotation
could build the station on a budget of $17.4 billion over missions until the space shuttle’s return to ﬂight on J uly
a 10—year period. It could not have been more wrong 26, 2005. Since then construction has resumed on 188
had it set out to offer disinformation. After three years and most recently the Columbus research module was
of insisting that it could build 188 for $17.4 billion, in launched on February 7, 2008. This is the ESA’s largest
September 1997, NASA ﬁnally conceded it could not. single contribution to 188, and will provide ﬂexible

"
"13","R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 551
scientiﬁc research facilities. At the same time, Russia have been invested in the Space Station, we will need
continued its support with 15 missions to the station. to ensure that we wind up with the world—Class re—

search facility that we have been promised.” As an
9. Reconsidering the rationale for the space station aside to his prepared remarks, Hall added that NASA
had better ﬁnd a way to use the ISS effectively. He

Even as these efforts continued, much of the discus— said that some astounding scientiﬁc discovery should

sion of 133 had devolved into a debate over questions of be forthcoming—he speciﬁcally mentioned a cure for
mismanagement, cost, and purpose. That last question, cancer—or the program could rapidly lose political sup—
concerning purpose, has proven the most contentious port [48].
[45]. It appears that space stations, which had so domi— It looks like this happened only ﬁve years into the
nated thinking about human space exploration through— new century. Even the NASA administrator has called
out the twentieth century, would be overcome by events 133, along with the Space Shuttle, a “mistake.” As re—
in the new century. Always space stations had been enVi— ported in a page one story in USA Today on Septem—
sioned as launching points for any mission to the Moon ber 29, 2005, Mike Grifﬁn said, “It is now commonly
of to Mars. Using the space station as a base camp, ac— accepted that [shuttle and station] was HOt the right
cording to this thought process, humanity would be able path,. . .We are now trying to Change the path while do—
to return to the Moon and establish a permanent human ing as little damage as we can.” Seemingly, 188 is irrel—
presence there. Using the space station as a waypoint evant to NASA’s task of exploring beyond Earth orbit.
above the gravity well, it would no longer be quite so But how do we Change the path? Does it involve quietly
hard to go elsewhere in the solar system. But it quickly withdrawing the resources necessary to utilize ISS and
became apparent that 188, with its 510 inclination orbit reprogramming it for other purposes? Does it involve
and spare capabilities, would have limited usefulness turning 188 over to another entity? Does it involve both
for that purpose [46]. of those options and perhaps others? [49].

At the same time, the expectation that 188 would Avoiding a debacle concerning the utilization of ISS
become a centerpiece of research in orbit, what some will require dealing with four major factors currently
have referred to as an “NIH in space,” held certain at— limiting use. The ﬁrst is the problem of space access.
traction at least for a time. Who knew what manner With the Space Shuttle ﬂeet grounded through the sum—
of bio—technical discoveries might spring from research mer Of 2005 following the Columbia accident of Febru—
conducted there? Others have emphasized the station’s ary l, 2003, reaching 188 became a task not without
signiﬁcance as a laboratory for the physical sciences, difﬁculties. The shuttle provided enormous capability
with materials processing in microgravity the chief re— to bring cargo and equipment to 188, to say nothing
search effort. Still others suggested that human factors of the components for completing it, and offered as
research might gain a leap forward because of the work much as a 20,000 pound down—mass capability in any
on 188, simply because data about changes to the bod— return to Earth. Its hiatus meant that the crew comple—
ies of astronauts engaging in long duration spaceﬂight ment shrunk by one—third and the ability to move eX—
would expand the base of scientiﬁc knowledge. Finally, periments and other components to and from 188 was
some have contended that 188 offered a platform for limited to Soyuz capsules and Progress resupply mod—
greater scientiﬁc understanding of the universe, espe— ules. That problem did abate when the shuttle returned
Cially about the origins and evolution of the Sun and to on—going ﬂights in 2005, but with the prospect of
the planets of this solar system. Those four scientiﬁc the shuttle’s retirement a long—term issue looms on the
endeavors—bio—tech research,materia1s science, human horizon. Second, crew time on orbit is another limiting
factors, and space science—represented a panoply of factor, and one Closely related to the access issue. Ag—
scientiﬁc opportunities once ballyhooed by advocates gressively working to ensure a larger crew aboard 133,
of the 188 [47]. and maximizing their time to support research activi—

The expectation of path—breaking research on—orbit ties, is a prudent course. Third, the development of eX—
continues to abound. In 2001 Representative Ralph M, periments and funding available to conduct them should
Hall (then Democrat—Texas), speaking at the Ameri— take a higher priority place at NASA than is presently
can Astronautical Society’s Goddard Memorial Sym— the case. Even understanding the very real limitations of
posium, commented that while elements of 188 had funding for science Vis—a—Vis other critical priorities,it is
been launched and crews placed aboard, he questioned important that NASA make a good—faith effort to make
NASA’s resolve to utilize this new capability. He chal— 188 a world—Class research facility as it has promised
lenged NASA, “After all of the taxpayer dollars that for more than two decades. Finally, there are on—going

"
"14","552 KB. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
bureaucratic Challenges, some of them relating to inter— establishing a permanent presence in space—the seem—
national commitments, some domestic that require con— ing task of space stations from the beginning of the
tinuing diligence [50]. twentieth century—if those stations do not serve as a
At a fundamental level, notwithstanding Ralph Hall’s means to facilitate something beyond one must question
quixotic call for curing cancer, the spaceﬂight commu— why they should be continued in the twenty—ﬁrst cen—
nity cannot abandon serious efforts to utilize 188. It tury. Alex Roland, an historian from Duke University,
plays into the hands of those who advocate a zeroing has likened both the human presence on 188 and on the
out of the human spaceﬂight effort in the United States. Space Shuttle as akin to ﬂag—pole sitting. While he rec—
As the New York Times editorialized on November 25, ognizes that a case could be made for it, Roland did not
2001: “in truth, it has never been Clear just what science see it as a particularly compelling one. It ranges from
needs to be done on a permanently manned platform in the pragmatic to the mystical, from the fact that humans
space as opposed to an unmanned platform or an earth— going elsewhere can respond creatively to unforeseen
bound facility” [51]. If humanity uses the space station problems to the ethereal vantage point of a new place
neither as a base camp to go elsewhere nor as a facility from which to View the universe [53]. “The Space Sta—
for research, just what then is its purpose? tion is simply a world—Class ﬂag pole,” Roland insists.
That question arose in a truly fundamental way on “Being there is an end in itself” [54].
J anuary 14, 2004, when President George W. Bush an— Perhaps the space station’s time has both come and
nounced a Vision for Space Exploration that called for gone in the twentieth century. Only the future will offer
humans to reach for the Moon and Mars during the next a resolution to conundrum.
30 years. As stated at the time, the fundamental goal
of this Vision is to advance U.S. scientiﬁc, security, and ,
economic interests through a robust space exploration 10' Conclusmn
program. In support of this goal, the United States an— ,
nounced it would: The dream of a permanent presence 1n space, made
sustainable by a vehicle providing routine access at an
. implement a sustained and affordable human and affordable price has tiriyen space exploration advocates
robotic program to explore the solar system and Since at least the beginning of the twentieth century. A11
beyond; of the spacefaring nations of, the world have accepted
0 extend human presence across the solar system, start— that p aradigin as the razson d etre Of Its p rograms 1n the
ing with a human return to the Moon by the year latter twentieth century. It drove the Uniteo States to
2020, in preparation for human exploration of Mars (ievelop the Space Shuttle as. a means Of ach1ev1ng rou—
and other destinations; tine aceess and prompted an international eonsortium of
0 develop the innovative technologies, knowledge, and 14 nations to 13.1““ a space station to achieve a p erma—
infrastructures both to explore and to support deci— nent p resence in space. Only thiough the achievement
sions about the destinations for human exploration; Of these goals, space advocates 1ns1st, W111 a V1.810n Of
and space exploration that includes people venturing into the
0 promote international and commercial participation unhnown be ultimately .realized. Thls scenario makes
in exploration to further U.S. scientiﬁc, security, and eminent sense If one 1? interested in develop 1ng an CX—
economic in teres ts. pans1ve space exploration effort, one that would lead to
the permanent colonization of humans on other worlds.
In so doing the president called for completion of the , At the same time, thls VISIOH has not 9ft?“ been. €01,1—
ISS and retirement of the Space Shuttle ﬂeet by 2010. s1stent.w1th many of the elementsof political reality in
Resources expended there would go toward creating the the United States. Numerous questions abound at the be—
enabling technologies necessary to return to the Moon ginning Of the twenty—first century concerning the need
and eventually to Mars. By 2008, however, it had be— for .aggiesswe exp 1013“?“ Of the Solar System ant] the
come highly uncertain that the initiative could be real— des1rab111ty Of colonizationon other woilfis' A y1s1on
ized. It appeared increasingly that this proposal would of aggresswe space exploration, wrote political sc1ent1st
follow the path of the aborted Space Exploration Ini— Dwayne A' Day,
tiative (SE1) announced with great fanfare in 1989 but implies that a long range human space plan is nec—
derailed in the early 1990s [52]. essary for the nation without justifying that belief.
There has been no resolution to the issue of purpose Political decision—makers have rarely agreed with the
in the 188 program. While humanity may take pride in View that a long range plan for the human exploration

"
"15","R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 553
of space is as necessary as—say—a long range plan the Sixth History Symposia of the International Academy of
for attacking poverty 01' developing a strategic deter- Astronautics, AAS History SCI‘lCS, V01. 7, UanClt, Il’lC., San
rent. Space is not Viewed by many politicians as a Diego’ CA’ 1986’ pp' 171—174'

“problem” but as at bes t an opportunity and at WOI‘S t [3] H. Noordung, The Problem of Space Travel: The Rocket Motor,
3 luxury [55] 2182163.;tultlll1nger, J 1133C ngrslsey, J. Garland (Eds), NASA SP—
' , as 1ngton, , .
Most importantly, the high C ost Of C onductin g Sp ac e [4] On these articles see R. Liebermann, .The Collier’s and
. . . . . D1sney Ser1es, 1n: F.I. Ordway III, R. Le1bermann (Eds), R.
exploratlon comes qUICkly 1nto any dISCUSSIOH Of the Liebermann, Blueprint for Space: From Science Fiction to
endeaVor- Science Fact, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, DC,
Of course, there are other Visions of spaceﬂight 1991, pp. 135—144; R. Liebermann, Man Will Conquer Space
less ambitious that are more easily justiﬁed within the 50011 series, Cellief’s, March 22, 1952, 1313- 2.3-76ff; W VOH
democratic process of the United States. Aimed at Braun’ C' Ryan’ Can we Get to Mam? Coll1er 8’ Aprﬂ 30’
. . . 1954, pp. 22—28.
Incrememal advances’ these {Hebde I‘ObOUC planetary [5] RD. Launius, Space Stations: Base Camps to the Stars,
exploratlon and severely 11m1ted human space act1V— Smithsonian Books, Washington, DC, 2002 pp. 43—48.
itieS- MOSt Of What iS Presently underway under the [6] SD. Fries, 2001 to 1994: political environment and the design
umbrella of NASA in the United States and the other of NASA’s Space Station System, in: MG LaFollette, J.K. Stine
space agencies Of the world fall into this category. (Eds), Technology and Choice: Readings from Technology
Yet, these only moderately ambitious space efforts also 33d 23121;: UniverSity Of Chicago Press’ Chicago’ 1991’
false 1mportant quesuoné abOUt pUth pOhCy p rlor1t1es [7] AC. Clarke, 2001: A Space Odyssey, New American Library,
and other ﬁscal respons1b111t1es. At present the NASA New York, 1968;
budget, however, stands at only about one—seventh of R.D. Launius, 2001: The Odyssey Continues, Space Times:
one percent of the Federal budget and is declining both Magazine Of the American Astronautical Society 40 (2001) 3,22
in real terms and as a percentage Of the Federal bud— [8] Fl. Ordway III, The Eyolution of Space Fiction in Film,.in:
get every year as the new century progresses. Is that R'D' Léumus (Ed')’ .Hlsmry Of R.Wkwy artd AStronauucéz
, , Proceed1ngs of the F1fteenth and S1xteenth H1story Sympos1a
tOO mUCh to pay to aChleVC the goal Of dISCOVCI‘y and of the International Academy of Astronautics, vol. 11, Univelt,
exploration of the universe around us and ultimately to Inc, San Diego, 1994, pp. 13_29;
achieve the long sought dream of journeying elsewhere F.I. Ordway 111, Space ﬁction in ﬁlm—2001: a Space Odyssey
to new lands and to create new cultures? [56]. :1 retrOSPSCF i111: Fg-M-Smme $33, SCience F1090“ and Space
. . . . . utures, n1ve t, an 1e 0, .;
SP3”? hats always had the ablhty to exam and mSplre in: J. Agel (Ed.), The Makigng of Kubrick’s 2001, New American
humanlty, Just as eXploratlon of the world beyond Eu— Library, New York, 1970.
rope in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth centuries inspired and [9] House Science and Technology Committee, Subcommittee
excited those nations. Like those earlier explorations it on Space Science and Applications, NASA’s Space Station
holds the allure of discovery of a vast unknown awaiting AetiVities, 98th Congress, lst session, 1983, 13- 4-
human assimilation, an allure particularly appealing to [10] Mitchell Waldrop, Space City: 2001 It’s Not, Science 83 (1983).
a society such as the United States that has been heavily [11] For a full history of Skylab see W. David Compton and CD.
. . . . Benson, Living and Working in Space: A History of Skylab,
1nﬂuenced by terr1tor1al eXpans1on. In many respects, N As A SP— 4208, Washi n gt 0 n, DC, 1983; DJ. Shayler, Skylab:
space exploration represents What the 19605 1301311131"" America’s Space Station, Springer—Praxis, Chicester, UK, 2001.
culture television phenomenon of “Star Trek” dubbed [12] See H.E. McCurdy, The Space Station Decision: Incremental
it, the “ﬁnal frontier,” The goal of a permanent pI‘CS— Politics and Technological Choice, Johns Hopkins University
ence in space could be and is routinely considered by [13] :reSS’ faﬁtlﬁofe’ hﬁ/[D’ 1990'] 25 1984 P bl' P f
- - - - tate o t e n1on essa e, anuary , , u 1c apers o
advocates 9f ix p l01tat10n as ma] 01‘ Steps In, Opglmg the,“ the Presidents of the Unitged States: Ronald Reagan, 1984, US.
ﬁnal front1er but 1s a more apt Characterlzatlon at th1s Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1986, p. 90.
130th “Space: the failed ffehtief?” Has the time fer the [14] SD. Fries, 2001 to 1994, in: LaFollette, Stine (Eds),
space station both come and gone within a few short Technology and Choice, pp. 253—257.
years or is it still critical to the human future in space? [15] J.M. Logsdon, International Cooperation in the Space Station
Programme: Assessing the Experience to Date, Space Policy 7
References (1991) 35—45
[16] See H.E. McCurdy, Space Station Decision, pp. 101—102;
_ _ US. Congress, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, International
[1] EB Hale, The Ban Moon’ The Atlant1c Monthly, 1869’ p p ' Partnerships in Large Science Projects, OTA—BP—ETI—150, U.S.
451—460’ 603—611’ 679—688' Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1995.
[2] LA. Kol’chenko, I.V. Strazheva, The ideas of K.E. Tsiolkovskiy [17] J.M. Logsdon, International Cooperation in the Space Station
on orbital space stations, in: R. Cargill Hall (Ed.), History of Programme, pp. 35—45; E.W. Messerschmid, A European
Rocketry and Astronautics: Proceedings of the Third through Perspective: International Cooperation for Future Space

"
"16","554 KB. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555
Science Missions, Space Times: Magazine of the American [36] NASA Johnson Space Center, STS—96 Post—Mission Summary,
Astronautical Society 34 (1995) 2—6. NASA Historical Reference Collection.
[18] Quoted in McCurdy, Space Station Decision, p. 171. [37] NASA Johnson Space Center Fact Sheet, The International
[19] Pie in the Sky: Big Science is Ready for B1ast0ff,C0ngressional Space Station: The FhSt Steps t0 a New Home in Orbit, June
Quarterly Weekly Report, 28 April 1990, pp. 12544259; 1999, NASA H1stor1cal Reference C011ect10n.
Overhaul Ordered for Space Station Design, Congressional [381M- Smith, NASA’S Space Station Program: Evolution and
Quarterly Almanac 1990, Congressional Quarterly, Washington, Current Status, April 4, 2001; K- Cowing, The Service Module
DC, 1991, p. 436. Has Been Launched, SpaceRef.com, July 9, 2000, NASA
[20] Quoted in McCurdy, Space Station Decision, p. 194. Historical Reference Collection.
[21] AL. Gruen, Deep Space Nein? The Troubled History of Space [39] NASA Johnson Space Center, STS—101 Outﬁts Ihternat10nal
Station Freedom, Ad Astra, May/June 1993’ pp. 18—23. Space Stat10n, NASA H1stor1cal Reference C011ect10n.
[22] Freedom Fighters Win Again: Senate Keeps Space Station, [40] NASA Jehnsen Space Center, 109th Space Shuttle thht’
Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, September 12, 1992, NASA H1stor1cal Reference C011ect10n.
p. 2722. [41] Space News, Space Times: Magazine of the American
[23] U.S. Congress, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, U.S.—Russian Astronaut1cal Soc1ety 40 (2091) 1.6; R.D..Laun1us, 2001: The
Cooperation in Space, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Odyssey C0nt1nues, Space T1mes. Magazme Of the Amer1can
Washington, DC, 1995, Astronautlcel Soc1ety 40 (2001) 3, 12.
[24] C. Morgan, Shuttle—Mir: The U.S. and Russia Share History’s [42] SAISdA .Ad\:l1sol:yFC0unc1l, lﬁépl orgteffthe EgstsAsseSEhlenft) and
Highest Stage, NASA SP—2001—4225, Washington, DC, 2001, a 1 anon .33 (”Ce 13' ’ ' e ten e um 0 “S am
1313- 8—31. Popular Sc1ence (1998) 3—7.
[25] RD. Launius, Making History in Space, Pointing Directions [43] Sm1th, NASAS Space Stat10n Programi Evolut10n ahd Curreht
. . . . Status, test1m0ny before the House Sc1ence Commlttee, Apr1l
for the Future: A ReV1ew 0f the Recent Atlant1s/M1r Dockmg , , ,
. . . . . . 4, 2001, NASA H1stor1cal Reference C011ect10n.
M1ss10n, Space T1mes: Magazme 0f the Amer1can Astronaut1cal _ _ _
Society 34 (1995) 4—8. [44] ff 1:1;1‘1‘18, 1;:ASA Ad131n1st1ratolirI Explhesse7s 3381301; for 188
[26] NASA Press Release, Continuation of U.S./Russia Space as. oree ecommen at10ns, ovem er ’ ’ erospace
. . . . . . Da1ly; Br1an Berger, Canad1ans, Europeans Warn U.S. on Space
C00perat10n H1ghl1ghts Th1rd Shuttle M1ss10n of 1996, . . . .
. . . Stat10n, November 7, 2001, Space.com, all 1n NASA H1stor1cal
March 1996, NASA H1stor1cal Reference C011ect10n, NASA . .
Head uarter Washin ton D C Reference C011ect10n; A Space Stat10n Out of Control, New
[271B Bq h’ D gﬂ N ASA d h C. _ b d h M York Times, November 25, 2001.

. urroug , ragon y: an t e I‘lSlS a oar t e 11, 45 NASA K S St t' M J 1 10 2001 .
Ballinger Pub. C0., New York, 1998, pp. 133—134, 145—147, [ ] osseseoneif 5:3“ am essages’ uy ’ ’ COPY 1”
153—154,161—166,180—181. p _ ' _

28 JM L' Off h P1 . S , , F' P ,1 M h [46] RD. Laumus, Space Stat10ns: Base Camps t0 the Stars,
[ ] ' ' 1nenger, t e anet. urV1V1ng 1ve er1 ous ont S Smithsonian Books, Washington, DC, 2003, pp. 209—230.
aboard the Space Stat10n M11, McGraw—Hﬂl, New York, 1999 , , ,
p 95 [47] NASA Ofﬁce of B1010g1ca1 and Phys1cal Research, OBPR Near
' ' . . . . . Term 188 Research Priority Deﬁnitions (2002—2006), NASA,
[29] J.M. Legsdon, The Spece Stat10n 1s F1nally Real, Space T1mes. Washington, DC, June 2001’ P- 1; A. Thomas Young, Report
Magazme 0f the Amer1can Astronaut1cal Soc1ety 34 (1995) 23. by the International Space Station (188) Management and
[30] Some of these same thoughts are expressed in K.T. Jackson, Cost Evaluation (IMCE) Task Force to the NAS A Advisory
Introduction: the shape 0f things to come: urban growth in Council, November 1, 2001, p. 29, NASA Historical Reference
the south and west, in: R.B. Fairbanks, K. Underwood (Eds), Collection, NAS A Headquarters, Washington, DC.
Essays on Sunbelt Cities and Recent Urban America, Texas [48] H.R.M. Hall Speech to the A AS Goddard Memorial
A&M Un1vers1ty Press, College Stat10n, 1990’ p ' 7' Symposium, March 27, 2001, Greenbelt, published as ‘A Time
[31] See R-D- Launius, H-E- McCurdy, Imagining Space: of Transition’: Remarks t0 the American Astronautical Society’s
Achievements, Projections, Possibilities, 1950—2050, Chronicle Goddard Memorial Symposium, Space Times: Magazine of the
Books, San Francisco, CA, 2001, pp. 94—98. American Astronautical Society 40 (2001) 12—15.
[32] See R-D- Launius, H-E- McCurdy, Imagining Space: [49] T. Watson, NASA Administrator says Space Shuttle was a
Achievements, Projections, Possibilities, 1950—2050, Chronicle Mistake, USA Today, September 28, 2005, p. 1A.
130016, San Francisco, CA, 2001’ 13' 8' [50] IA. Vedda, The changing purpose of the space station, Quest:
[33] NASA, International Space Station User’s Guide, Release 2.0, The History of Spaceﬂight Quarterly 13 (3) (2006) 34—39.
n.d., p. 10, NASA Historical Reference Collection; NASA [51] A Space Station Out of Control, New York Times, November
Ames Research Center Fact Sheet, ARC—97—04, Gravitational 25’ 2001.
B1010gy F2101l1ty and Centr1fuge Fac1l1ty 011 the Internat10nal [52] F. Si etz e 11 J1, K.L. C owi n g, New M 0 0 11 R1 si 11 g: The M aki n g
Space Stat10n, September 1997, NASA H1stor1cal Reference of the Bush S P a c e Vision, A P 0 g e e B 0 oks, Bu 111 n gt 0 11, Ontario,
C011ect10n. . 2004; C. Cornelius, Science in the National Vision for Space
[34] NASA Johnson Space Center Fact Sheet, The Interhat10nal Exploration: Objectives and Constituencies 0f the ‘Discovery—
Space Stat10n: An OverV1ew, June 1999, NASA H1stor1cal Driven’ Paradigm, Space Policy 21 (2005) 41—48; W. Mendell,
Reference Collectlon. The Vision for Human Spaceﬂight, Space Policy 21 (2005)
[35] NASA Johnson Space Center Fact Sheet, The International 7—10; T. Hogan, Mars Wars: The Rise and Fall of the Space
Space Station: The First Steps to a New Home in Orbit, June Exploration Initiative, NASA SP—2007—4410, Washington, DC,
1999, NASA Historical Reference Collection. 2007.

"
"17","R.D. Launius /Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 539—555 555

[53] J . Christensen, Skeptics Put Glenn, NASA under the Microsco— [55] DA. Day, The Von Braun Paradigm, Space Times: Magazine
pe, (http://WWW.cnn.com/SPECIALS/1998/06/glenn/skeptics/), 0f the American Astronautical Society 33 (1994) 12—15 quote
accessed January 2, 2008. from p. 15.

[54] A. Roland, Silo—Sitting in Space, paper presented at Harnessing [56] Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year
the Heavens: National Defense through Space, 213t Military 1995 Activities, US. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington,
History Symposium, October 1—3, 2006, copy in possession of DC, 1996, appendix A1.
author.

"
