"","x"
"1","FE...» Available online at www.sciencedirect.com —""————_
Eﬂﬁi‘
«5‘1 ‘9"" S ' D' t mm
W C'ence ""6C msmmmnttm
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612 m
WWW.elseVier.com/locate/actaastro
REVIEW
Space medielne policy development for the Internatlonal
Space Station
Anatoly I. Grigorieva, Richard S. Williamsb, J ean—Marc Comtoisc, Volker Damannd,
ShOiChi Tachibanae, Arnauld E. Nicogossianb’ g, Valery V. Bogomolova, Sam L. P001f ,
Ashot E. Sargsyanl, Oleg L. Knowingkovl, Charles R. Dearnb’ h’*
aInstitute for Biomedical Problems (IBMP), Moscow, Russia
bOﬁ‘ice 0f the Chief Health and Medical Oﬁ‘icer, NASA Headquarters, Washington DC, USA
CCanadian Space Agency, Saint-Hubert, Quebec, Canada
dEuropean Astronaut Centen European Space Agency, Cologne, Germany
eJazpcm Aerospace Exploration Agency, Tokyo, Japan
fNASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA
gGeorge Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
. hUniversity of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA
1Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering Group, Houston, TX, USA
JDynamazc Corporation, NASA Kennedy Space Centen FL, USA
Received 23 December 2008; received in revised form 23 February 2009; accepted 3 March 2009
Available online 8 April 2009
Abstract
Providing medical care capability in a multinational setting in space is a daunting challenge. As the International Space Station
(ISS) has taken shape over the last decade the space medicine community of the ISS partners has established a foundation With
Which to govern medical policy, medial processes, and medical care during the ISS Program. This foundation was predicated
on a rich history of bilateral and multilateral cooperation among space faring nations. Three key organizations were established,
they include the agency or senior level Multilateral Medical Policy Board (MMPB), the Multilateral Space Medicine Board
(MSMB), and the Multilateral Medical Operations Panel (MMOP). All three are staffed by senior medical personnel Within each
of the partner organizations of the ISS and each has speciﬁc roles and responsibilities. These three entities strive to protect the
human element of spaceﬂight through highly effective interaction in a multilingual, multicultural program. This paper reviews
the creation of this tripartite approach to the development of medical policy for ISS.
© 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Medical care; Medicine; Multilateral; Multinational; International medical policy; ISS
* Corresponding author. Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati, 231 Albert Sabin Way, SRU 1446 ML 0558, Cincinnati, OH
45267—0558, USA. Tel.: +1513558 6148, Cell: +1513403 9604; fax: +1513 558 2026.
E-mail address: charles.d0arn@uc.edu (CR. Doarn).
0094—5765/$—see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 10. 1016/j .actaastr0.2009.03 .005

"
"2","604 A1. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612
Contents
1. Introduction 604
2. Author1ty604
2.1.Hist0ricalcontext 605
2.2.Creatingaplatformforinteraction................................................................................... 605
3. Establishmentofcurrent structure 606
3.1.MMPB roles andresponsibilities 606
3.2.MSMB roles andresponsibilities 607
3.3.MMOProles andresponsibilities 607
3.4.Summary ofMMPB act1V1t1es 608
4. Integratedapproach t0 medlcalpohcy 608
4.1. Evidence—based scientiﬁc approach to the development and operation of the 188 medical support system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 608
4.2.C0mm0n spacemedicine standards 609
4.3.Principles ofongoingintegratedmedicalsupport 610
4.4.C0nsensus andissueresolution...................................................................................... 610
5. Conclusion 611
References 611
1. Introduction Purposes.” This bilateral agreement set the stage for
mutually beneﬁcial cooperation in space, including full
The early 1990s saw an openness in human partnership in an International Space Station, exchange
exploration of space on a grand scale. Former adver— 0f crews 0n the Space Shuttle and the Mir Space Sta—
saries became staunch partners in developing a perma— tion, and further collaboration in space exploration. The
nent outpost in space. The Union of Soviet Socialist agreement speciﬁcally mentioned cooperation in the ar—
Republics (USSR) had garnered signiﬁcant experience eas 0f microgravity sciences, engineering, biotechnol—
in building and maintaining space stations in low earth ogy, space physics, space medicine, biology, and Earth
orbit and the United States of America (US) had es— observation. It also addressed overall space ﬂight safety
tablished preeminence in building and maintaining a issues and potential future cooperation in planning for
reusable spacecraft, the US Space Shuttle. The US exploration missions of Mars.
program, under the National Aeronautics and Space This agreement deﬁned three distinct phases. Phase
Administration (NASA), had embarked on the building 1—c00perative ﬂights and exchange of US astronauts
0f the Space Station Freedom program in the 1980s. and Russian cosmonauts 0n the Space Shuttle and Mir
This program was international in nature and included Space Station. The second phase (Phase 2)—early con—
a wide variety of nations, each providing elements for struction of the redesigned International Space Station
the construction of a permanent International Space (ISS)—required NASA to launch and mate in orbit the
Station (188). Freedom was in the initial stages of a ma— Zarya (Sunrise) Functional Cargo Block (FGB) built
jor redesign in the early 1990s as geopolitical Changes by Krunichev State Research and Production Center
were occurring in the Soviet Union. (KhSC) for RosaViakosmos also known as the Russian
As the USSR dissolved into the Commonwealth of Space Agency (RSA) and the main docking node, Unity,
Independent States in 1991, Russia maintained its lead— which was built by Boeing Aerospace for NASA. The
ership role in space exploration among the former 80— current program, known as Phase 3, includes full de—
Viet states. There was interest by both the government ployment and operations of the research laboratories
of Russia and the US to further develop mutual col— from all the international partners (IP) 011 the ISS.
laboration in human spaceﬂight. This included bring—
ing Russia into the Space Station Freedom program. On 2. Authority
J une 17, 1992, US President George H.W. Bush and
Russian Federation (RF) President Boris Yeltsin signed Cooperation for the construction and operation of
the “Agreement between the United States of America the 188 is deﬁned by the agreement among the GOV—
and the Russian Federation Concerning Cooperation in ernments of Canada; Member States of the European
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Space Agency (ESA) (Belgium, Denmark, Norway, The

"
"3","A.I. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612 605
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Great Britain and North— have conducted cooperative programs with European
ern Ireland, France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland), countries and China.
J apan, the RF, and the US [1]. This agreement stipu— During each of these collaborations, medical care was
lates that the US has the lead role for overall ISS man— provided by the host country (either US or USSIURF).
agement and coordination, and that detailed provisions To this point, there had been limited or no cooperation
for implementation of the agreement are contained in on medical support for long duration missions. How—
the four Memoranda of Understanding (MOU), which ever, this historical work laid a strong foundation with
were signed in 1998, as bilateral agreements between which to build upon.
NASA and each individual ISS partner [2]. The evolution and implementation of space medicine

These agreements serve as the foundation for es— policies that currently govern the medical support of ISS
tablishing the ISS and building the necessary pro— represents a valuable archetype for future international
cesses for operating every aspect of this multinational cooperation in the area of space medicine or operational
program. medical systems of other specializations.

2.1. Historical context
2.2. Creating a platform for interaction

Although space exploration was highly competitive
and a matter of national prestige to the US and USSR Planning for medical care for the ISS involved
from the late 1950s, there was a signiﬁcant amount of complex policy development by medical representa—
interaction between these two countries as well as sig— tives of the ﬁve original IP’s—NASA, RSA, CSA,
niﬁcant interaction with other nations involved in space BSA, and NASDA. This initial process was bilateral
exploration. These collaborations covered many disci— (NASNRSA) but has evolved into a multilateral activ—
plines but they set the stage for the issue of medical ity as the program has matured.
care. In the summer of 1992, Russian and American ofﬁ—

In 1971, the J 0th USﬂJSSR Working Group (JWG) Cials met in Washington, DC, to participate in the Space
on Space Biology and Medicine was established by Station Freedom redesign reView. The Russian delega—
Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko (USSR) and Dr. Charles A. Berry tion, led by general designer Yuri P. Semyonov, included
(US). The JWG performed a number of important ac— eXperts in space medicine (Dr. Valery V. Bogomolov
tiVities, including a reView of reports on space biol— from the Institute for Biomedical Problems (IBMP))
ogy and medicine from both countries, discussion on and life support systems (Eduard Grigorov from En—
the biomedical research and operational methodologies; ergia). Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian represented space re—
and the conduct of research projects such as the bed rest search, life support, and space medicine for NASA.
study in 1977 and the highly successful international During bilateral meetings between the Russian and US
biomedical project on the Russian BION satellites [3]. delegations, the US side, supported by the other IPs,

From 1972 through 1975, the ﬁrst international joint indicated a willingness to consider joint endeavors in
ﬂight, the Apollo—Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), was de— human spaceﬂight. The Russian side offered the US
veloped and implemented under an intergovernmental an opportunity to participate in long duration space
agreement between the US and the USSR. The ASTP missions on the Mir Space Station to conduct joint re—
was the ﬁrst activity to integrate the technologies and search, ﬂy international crews of astronauts and cosmo—
designs of space systems from two different nations and nauts on Mir and Shuttle, and to begin familiarization
the ﬁrst signiﬁcant international cooperative effort in with the engineering infrastructure of the human space
space medicine. A joint document, describing the med— ﬂight programs of both countries. The Russian proposal
ical support requirements for the ASTP, was developed was incorporated into the overall strategy, accelerating
and has served as a prototype for subsequent agreements the space infrastructure capability development. The or—
on the standardization of medical support of joint mis— biting Mir station was recognized as the ﬁrst phase
sions [4—6]. (Phase 1) and the precursor to the 188.

Since that time, NASA has worked extensively with On October 5, 1992, RSA Administrator Yuri KopteV
ESA, the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency and NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin signed a bi—
(JAXA) (formerly National Aeronautics and Space De— lateral agreement committing the two agencies to eX—
Velopment Agency (NASDA) of J apan), and the Cana— Change crew—astronauts on Mir and cosmonauts on the
dian Space Agency (CSA) on numerous Space Shuttle Shuttle. Russia would redesign the existing docking
ﬂights. Similarly, the USSR and subsequently the RF adapter for the Shuttle to dock to Mir.

"
"4","606 Al. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612
In 1993, the US—Russian Joint Commission on Eco— in space medicine from each partner. They developed
nomic and Technical Cooperation negotiated by US and proposed the governing principles for the medi—
Vice President Albert Gore and Russian Prime Minister cal support of the 188, which were deﬁned in Article
Viktor Chernomyrdin (Gore—Chernomyrdin Commis— 11.4 of each 188 MOU [2,9,10]. This Article autho—
sion) was chartered. In October 1993, organizational rized three multilateralforums of 188 medical authority:
procedures and principles of medical support were de— (a) the Multilateral Medical Policy Board (MMPB), (b)
ﬁned for the Shuttle/Mir and NASNMir Joint Space the Multilateral Space Medicine Board (MSMB), and
Flight Programs. Dr. Nicogossian was responsible for (c) the Multilateral Medical Operations Panel (MMOP).
the oversight of a multifaceted research, development, The consensus on the establishment of these medical
and operational program, including the funding of the forums and on their responsibilities provided a frame—
Russian research and engineering community led by work for further consensus building.
the Academician Vladimr Utkin. Dr. Carolyn Leach
Huntoon and Dr. Anatoly GrigorieV were responsi— 3 Establishmen t of curren t s truc ture
ble for the development and implementation of the '
W .In MMPB be
Dr. Sam Pool were responsible for the development highestlevel 188 medical forum for medical p olicy. The
of the space medicine programs for all phases of 188. other two forums, staffed by senior level p hys1c1ans, in—
This created the Medical Operations Working Group clude the MSMB f.“ clinical .med1c1ne and the MMOP
(MOWG), which reported to the technical program for medical operations. The 8.1468. agreed to develop re—
managers, Mr. Valery V. Ryumin of RS A and Tommy qu1rements fortra1n1ng and eligibility for ﬂight surgeons
W. Holloway of N AS A. on console at each of the m1ss1on control centers, in—
In early 1994, at a join t meeting, MOWG #8, led cluding an exchange of ﬂight surgeons for training and
b Drs. Bogornolov and Valeri Morgun (Russia) and operations sup p on .
Dis. Pool and Roger Billica (US), was chartered. This The MMPB was formally chartered on :Ap “1 16’
group provided the foundation for working on medical 1998' RSA.S Dr. GﬂgOﬂeV (IBMP) and NASA S Lt' CPL
care issue for the Phase 1 program [7,8]. James Collier, MC, USAF seryed as the ﬁrst co—chairs;
On March 29, 1995, a Space Medicine Coopera— Dr: Gary Gray (CSAL Dr. Heinz Oser (BSA) and Dr.
tion Agreement was signed as part of the Shuttle/Mir Chiharu Sekiguchi (NASDA) were the other MMPB
Bilateral Cooperation Agreement. This document con— rnernbers. . .
cluded lengthy negotiations undertaken over the preVi— Since those early days of multilateral cooperation and
ous year that deﬁned preﬂight, inﬂight, and postﬂight experience Hm.“ the NASNMH p rogram, a robust 188
medical care and established roles and responsibilities medical operations and clinical dec1s1on rnakinginfras—
for crew surgeons. The Shuttle/Mir program became the tructure evolved that is sup p orted by medical p olicy and
NASNMir program, with seven US crewmembers to inﬂuenced by events and lessonslearned. Table 1 lists
ﬂy on Mir and 11 Shu t tle ﬂights to Mir. those 1nd1V1duals who have part1c1pated in each of these
In 1995, the ﬁrst NASNMir crewmember exchange groups. .These three $01.11) S Of experts and the“ ma] or
occurred under an MOU deﬁning N AS A and RSA’s respons1bilit1es are highlighted in. Table 2. The MMPB
in terim approach to medical policy supporting human served an 1rnportant function during this formative pe—
spaceﬂight, signed on November 20, 1996. Under the “Pd by p rovi ding a forum for all the IPS to p resent and
interim agreement, both sides agreed that the US med— discuss medical issues.
ical requirements, deﬁned in the 188 Medical Opera—
tions Requirements Document (MORD) would serve 3,1, MMPB roles and responsibilities
as a basis for the development of detailed medical re—
quirements, which were subsequently formulated. This The MMPB is responsible for overarching policy
ﬂight experience provided valuable lessons on bilateral formulation and promulgation and oversight of all crew
collaboration—addressing the challenges Of providing health matters, and exercises its medical decision mak—
medical care in a bilateral and bilingual environment ing responsibility independent of the ISS Multilateral
[7,8]. Coordination Board (MCB) and other 188 manage—
While the Phase 1 program was operational, nego— ment forums. It is comprised of a single representative
tiations were underway with all the IPs to ﬁnalize the from each IP and is co—chaired by NASA and the RSA
MOU. This resulted in detailed discussions with leaders members during the ISS assembly phase. Once ISS

"
"5","A.I. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603 —612 607
assembly is complete, the Chair rotates among the part— 3.2. MSMB roles and responsibilities
ners annually. The MMPB considers issues that need
coordination with similar—level organizations, or The MSMB is primarily Clinical in nature and is
agency—level decision making, and ensures that medical responsible for medical certiﬁcation for training and
input is fully recognized in the general decision—making ﬂight in the 188 Program, reviews and approves space
system in the 188 Program. The MMPB provides policy medicine standards and certiﬁes physicians for practice
direction to the working—level medical organizations in of space medicine in support of the 188. The MSMB is
maintaining adequate medical management structure, co—Chaired by NASA and the RSA during 188 assem—
prioritizing their responsibilities and areas of activity. bly, with the Chair rotating annually among the IPs once
The MMPB provides guidance in further international assembly is complete.
efforts in development and reﬁnement of the Clinical The MSMB forwards recommendations and de—
practices of space medicine. Cisions concerning crew medical certiﬁcation to the
MMPB and 188 Multilateral Crew Operations Panel
Table 1 (MCOP). The MSMB operates on the principle of con—
Individuals involved as co—chairs 0f the tripartite boards. SCHSUS- ShOUId the MSMB fail to reaCh consensus on
— a matter of medical eligibility of a crewmember, or on
MMPB . . . other issues involving oversight of medical operations
Lt Col James Colher, Co—chair (orig) NASA , , ’
MC, USAF those issues are referred to the MMPB for resolution
Anatoly I. Grigoriev, MD Co—chair (orig) RSA and policy deﬁnition-
Richard S. Williams, Co—chair NASA
MD, MPH 3.3. MMOP roles and responsibilities
Charles R. Doarn, MBA Executive secretary NASA
Ofl . . .
Ashot E. Sargsyan, MD éxngglﬁve secretary N AS A The MMOP is comprised of representatives from
each IP and is responsible for developing and execut—
MSMB ing 188 medical operations requirements, standards,
Jemey R' DaViS’ MD CO'Chair NASA guidelines, and implementation plans. The MMOP is
Vﬂleﬁ Morgun’ MD CO‘Chair (orig) RSA h khorse 0f the three forums interactin on a
Sam L P001, MD Co—chair (orig) NASA t e wor , , , , ’ g
Vladimir PochueV, MD Co—Chair RS A regular bas1s. It is co—Chaired during 188 assembly by
NASA and the RSA. The primary tasks of the MMOP
MMOP and its subgroups are to develop and implement re—
Roger 13- Billica’ MD CO'Chair (orig) NASA quirements for medical support of the international ISS
Valery V‘ BogomOIOV’ MD CO‘Chair (mg) RSA crews preﬂight, inﬂight, and postﬂight. The MMOP
Terrance A. Taddeo, MD Co—chalr NASA , ,
— develops health standards, real—time ﬂight and ground
Table 2
Tripartite medical support forums for the 188.
Board Responsibilities Membership
MMPB Top—level medical policy and oversight One representative from each 1P
MSMB Crew medical certiﬁcation for 188 mission increment training A designated physician from each IP with ad hoc, non—
and ﬂight voting consultative members as required
Approve mission—assigned ﬂight surgeons endorsed by the
MMOP
Certiﬁes physicians for practice of space medicine
in support of the ISS.
MMOP Establishes processes for medical training and certiﬁcation of Medical representatives from all IPS
188 crewmembers, medical selection and certiﬁcation standards,
requirements for hardware and ground support, requirements for
human behavior and performance support, requirements for the
monitoring of the environment, requirements for the EMS, and
certiﬁcation guidelines for 188 IP ﬂight surgeons
Deﬁnes and implements medical monitoring and countermea—
sures and response capability for in—ﬂight medical events

"
"6","608 Al. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612
Table 3 Table 4
Select MMOP tasks. Select MMOP specialized subgroups.
MMOP tasks MMOP specialized subgroups
Development and implementation of the 188 medical operations Biomedical training
requirement document (MORD) Medical informatics and technology
Development of ISS crewmember medical selection standards In_ﬂight clinical medicine
Development of medical evaluation and care standards Postﬂight activities and rehabilitation
Development of training requirements and guidelines for 188 Environmental health
crewmembers and ﬂight surgeons, and endorsement of these physi— Nutrition
cians t0 the MSMB for approval Medical standards and health evaluation
Assignment of expedition crew surgeon Radiation health
Evaluation of medical hardware and medical and environmental Spaceﬂight human behavior and performance
monitoring capability Extravehicular activity
Countermeasures
medical documentation, and supports the work of inte— Medical policy decisions of MMPB have been issued
grated medical organizations for controlling ﬂight 0p— in a number of ways, including standalone MMPB p01-
erations on board the 188. Table 3 outlines a number of icy directives, statements in MMPB meeting minutes,
important MMOP tasks. MMPB letters, and review and eventual approval of
The MMOP established and is 511131)“th by special— high—level 188 documents, such as Charters, standards,
ized working groups in each area related to crew health, and requirements. IS S medical policies are shaped by
WhiCh are highlighted in Table 4' the MMPB with changes that result from recommenda—
The MMOP reports to the 188 Program Ofﬁce tions of the MSMB and MMOP.
through the ISS Multilateral Mission Integration and
Operations Control Board (MMIOCB). It also provides 4. Integrated approach to medical policy
periodic reports and responds to tasks assigned by the
MMPB' Since the Shuttle/Mir program, an integrated ap—
proach to 188 medical policy has been adopted and
3.4. Summary ofMMPB activities followed by all 188 partners. The expedition crew
surgeon leads the Integrated Medical Group (IMG),
The ﬁrst formal meeting of the MMPB took place composed of international ﬂight surgeons and medi—
in April 1998. Following this meeting, the MMPB has cal support specialists who are located at the mission
interacted through meetings and correspondence. It has control centers in Houston (MCC—H) and Moscow
established and managed 188 medical policy through (MCC—M) 0r MCC—IP. Consultants and specialists in
consultations with experts and by reviewing activities medicine and psychology are members of the IMG and
performed by MMOP and MSMB. As the 188 Pro— are available to participate as required. Decisions are
gram matured, the importance and frequency of the coordinated among all 188 medical counterparts and
MMPB meetings increased to address policy—level is— joint procedures are integrated into the common Station
sues brought to Board’s attention by the 188 Program, Operations Data ﬁle books and ground documentation,
the MSMB, the MMOP, or partner agencies through such as the 188 Medical Hardware Catalog.
their representatives. Table 5 summarizes the MMPB
meetings and key policy discussions in support of the 4.1. Evidence-based scientiﬁc approach to the
ISS. development and operation 0f the 155 medical support
The MMPB provides the leadership necessary to gen— system
erate a Viable medical policy framework for the com—
pleX and sophisticated medical infrastructure of the 188. As previously described, the MMPB establishes
MMPB decisions have enabled the practice of space health and medical policy and standards for medical
medicine in the ISS environment while adhering to and care and training. Policy and standards are derived
integrating overarching principles of medical care in from and incorporate experience gained from previ—
order to successfully direct the MSMB and MMOP ous missions. Operational experience and the results
through the complicated Challenges ofjoint medical 013- of research and technology advances drive policy and
erations. standards as they evolve. The medical support system

"
"7","A.I. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612 609
Table 5
Summary of MMPB policy meetings.
MMPB meeting # Meeting date and location Main agenda items Main products of the meeting
Founding April 16, 1998, Formal establishment of the MMPB and acceptance Initial version of the MMPB
meeting Washington, DC of the initial version of its Charter Charter
1 March 15—16, 2001, 188 MMOP and MSMB reports. Review of 188—1 Meeting summary With actions
Houston, TX and 188—2 medical support. Review of 188 medical and conclusions
standards and concepts of nominal and contingency
medical response. Policies for transition from bilat—
eral t0 multilateral operations
2 May 10, 2002, MMOP and MSMB reports, MMPB Charter update Meeting summary, draft Charter
Videoconference
3 December 04, 2003, Periodic reports and updates. Review of progress Meeting summary; MMPB policy
Moscow, Russia made towards full integration of crew medical sup— directive #1 (PD#l)
port. Review of the 188 medical support in the cur—
rent medical policy framework
4 April 5—7, 2004, Periodic reports and updates. Update to PD#1. Re— Meeting summary; PD#1
Washington, DC View and approval of the MSMB Charter
5 July 15, 2004, Periodic reports and updates. Increment duration Meeting summary
Videoconference limits and medical/health risks of duration exten—
sions
6 October 28, 2004, Periodic reports and updates. MMPB conﬂict res— Meeting summary
Videoconference olution methodology, NASA return to ﬂight status,
188 mission status review
7 March 14—15, 2005, Periodic reports and updates. Review of 188 medical Meeting summary; MMPB PD#2
Tsukuba, Japan support With special emphasis on the activities of
the JAXA medical organization. MMPB conﬂict
resolution
8 November 9—11, Periodic reports and updates. Development of med— Meeting summary
2005, Cologne Germany ical risk assessment methodology, enhancement of
cardiac screening algorithms for 188 crewmembers.
Review and approval of 188 medical standards, in—
cluding those for space ﬂight participants
9 April 24—25, 2006, Periodic reports and updates. Future developments Meeting summary
Washington DC of national space programs of ISS partners. NASA
information brieﬁngs, including NASA’s occupa—
tional health approach to human health protection
in space ﬂight.
10 November 03, 2006, Periodic reports and updates. Biomedical review of Meeting summary
Cologne, Germany 188 Expeditions 1—12. Approval of 188 medical
standards updates. Medical data sharing policy dis—
cussions
11 May 11, 2007, Johnson Periodic reports and updates. Medical data sharing Meeting summary; MMPB PD#3
Space Center policy approval (PD#3). Public release of the 188
medical standards for Space Flight Participants
12 November 12, 2007, Discussions focused on future cooperative space— Meeting summary
Tokyo, Japan ﬂight activities using MMPB as a foundation. Strate—
Videoconference gic directions of the MMPB were discussed. Rec—
ommendations for future discussion points at future
MMPB meetings
development is enhanced using the best available scien— 4.2. Common space medicine standards
tiﬁc and Clinical evidence. The evidence—base is derived
from research ﬁndings from ﬂight and analog environ— Recognizing the prime responsibility of protecting
ments, lessons learned from operational experience, the health and safety of the ISS crew, the MMPB has
and recommendations from consultant subject matter directed the MMOP and MSMB to develop common
experts. This approach assures that medical policies are space medicine standards. These standards include not
reviewed and may be updated as new evidence emerges. only medical certiﬁcation standards for space ﬂight

"
"8","610 Al. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612
crewmembers, but also requirements for training and (Soyuz—TMA or Progress) or an EVA is performed in
certiﬁcation of ﬂight surgeons and other medical support Russian Orlan spacesuits, MCC—M is the lead control
personnel, diagnostic protocols, countermeasures, treat— center.
ment protocols, environmental standards, post ﬂight re— The MCC—M was given control of 188 support during
habilitation, and radiation standards for the 188. In those September 2005 evacuation of the MCC—H personnel
areas not addressed by commonly agreed to standards, due to a tropical hurricane and medical control of the
the standards of each partner are recognized as valid mission was transferred to MCC—M.
until common standards are developed. The MMPB has Non—emergency medical or health contingencies on
emphasized the need for continuous amendment and the 188, including the care of illness or injury, are
improvement of the ISS space medicine standards. addressed by the Space Medicine Operations Team
(SMOT). SMOT meets weekly Via telecomm with all
4.3. Principles of ongoing integrated medical support IP’s medical representatives including crew surgeons.
Every week, SMOT reViews the planning and im—
T he MMPB deﬁned integrated medical support and plementation of current medical operations on board
responsibility for 188 crews for nominal ongoing op— the ISS and, when necessary, makes corrections to the
erations, in degraded support capability, and in medi— ISS crew health medical support program, assesses the
cal contingency situations. Medical control of the 188, medical services readiness for performing the missions,
similar to overall control of the 188, is implemented and develops recommendations for ﬂight controllers
from an integrated control center that includes MCC— in MCC-H and MCC—M. The SMOT reViews matters
M and MCC—H. IPs, CSA, BSA and JAXA have their relating to the medical status of ISS operations and,
own control centers for their 188 components. Some if necessary, refers it to the MSMB. If consensus on
of the partners have medical control organization and the response cannot be achieved, the matter will be
these interact with other IPs. The role of the lead MCC referred to the MMPB.
may Change, depending on the speciﬁc ﬂight operations, In all operational situations where the capability of
Medical support teams are comprised of the crew sur— one or more 188 health support systems is degraded,
geon, deputy crew surgeon, ﬂight surgeons of the IPs the combined resources of all partners are considered
whose crewmembers are working on orbit, and ﬂight in determining the ability of the remaining 188 systems
bioengineers. When the ﬂight and medical operations to SUppOrt the health and safety of the ISS crew. To fa—
are performed on Russian vehicles or per the Russian Cilitate this process, the MMPB members have made
program, the primary medical responsibility falls on the a commitment to share all necessary information in a
Russian medical organizations. When ﬂight and medi— timely fashion. Furthermore, MMPB members cooper—
Cal operations are performed on US vehicles or per the ate to make on—orbit ISS crew health support capabilities
US program, medical responsibility falls on the medi— available to all partners as appropriate, and to cooper—
Cal organizations of MCC—H. It is very important that ate in the analysis of samples and data. Non—emergency
the cooperation between the medical organizations of medical situations with potential major operational im—
MCC—H and MCC—M with regard to planning and im— pacts, such as situations requiring return of the crew
plementing medical operations takes place within the from 188 for a medical reason, are to be reported to the
IMG [11,13]. The lead role can and has changed due MMPB for reView. In such cases, any resulting decisions
to planned activities and emergency procedures such as and/or recommendations of the MMPB would be trans—
weather. mitted to the 188 Mission Management Team (MMT),
In nominal operations, the ISS MCC—H is the con— which has authority over operational implementation of
trolling center, with the ISS MCC—H crew surgeon decisions. In the event of amedical or health emergency
responsible for the medical care of all individuals on on board the 188 in which there is insufﬁcient time to
the 188 in cooperation with the designated crew sur— COHSlllt With the IMG/SMOT, MMOP, and the MMPB,
geons assigned to a given 188 Increment, The 188 the crew surgeon at the controlling MCC has the au—
crew surgeon consults with the crew surgeons of any thority to decide the appropriate medical response and
docked vehicles on any critical matter of crew health communicate it to the ISS Increment Flight Director.
prior to taking action, if doing so will not endanger
the health of the crew due to time constraints. When 4.4. Consensus and issue resolution
188 control is passed to another MCC, medical respon—
sibility is assumed by that center. For example, when When formulating policy directives, the MMPB
ﬂight operations are performed using Russian vehicles makes every effort to achieve consensus in medical and

"
"9","A.I. Grigoriev et al. /Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612 611
health decisions to best support the health of the crew. collaboration and an understanding of how best to
The principle of consensus is used by the ISS MCB, achieve it. The Chief medical ofﬁcials of each of the IPs
as well as by the MSMB, and MMOP. To achieve con— serve on the MMPB; they have substantially inﬂuenced
sistency across 188 boards, the MMPB uses consensus the planning and development of all aspects of ISS crew
adopting the following process for dispute resolution: healthcare. These same indiViduals, in the multilateral

. setting of the MMPB, have overcome the often pro—
In the event that consensus cannot be achieved on any . . . .
. . . . . . found differences and conﬂicting approaches to achieve
spe01ﬁc 1ssue Within the available t1me, the NASA . . . .
. . . a multilateral, medical author1ty structure. The medical
and RSA co—Cha1rs would attempt to reach a JOlIlt de— . .
. . . . . . . . policy framework, founded on a number of core pr1n—
c1s1on. If a101ntdec1s1on is not achieved, and only as . . . . . . .
. . . C1ples, has proven 1ts V1ab111ty. The validity of these
a last resort, the MMPB would articulate a dec1s1on . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . pohc1es 1s eV1denced by the cons1stently high quality of
cons1stent With the majority OplIllOIl. The m1nor1ty . . . . .
. . . crew medical support, the multilateral dec1s1on—mak1ng
opinion would also be fully reﬂected 1n the MMPB . . .
. . . at all levels of 188 medical status and readiness reV1ew,
minutes. However, any partner would retain their full . . . ,
. . . the stab111ty and high level of engagement of every 1P s
right to use the consultation and settlement of d1s— . . . . . . .
. . . , medical organization, and the cont1nued compatibility
putes prov1s1ons of Article 18 of the ISS MOU s. . . . . . .
. . . of the medical pohc1es With the overall ISS pohc1es
Pending resolution of any 1ssues through consulta— . .
. . . . and management pr1nc1ples. Based on these outcomes,
tions, and 1n accordance With the mechan1sm estab— . . .
. . . the 188 medical policy framework and the resulting
lished 1n that article, a partner may Choose not to . . .
. . . . . medical support system w111 serve as a successful, vali—
proceed w1th implementation of an MMPB dec1s1on . . .
. . . . . dated model of a multinational cooperative structure of
With respect to 1ts elements, assuming respons1b11— . . .
. . long—term nature With a high degree of medical, tech—
1ty for the outcome of that Ch01ce. The MMPB has . . . . . .
. . . . meal, and organizational integration. The expertise of
also expressed its consensus pos1tion that medical . . . . . .
. . . developing and maintaining such a V1able model Will
and health dec1s1ons must always remain the respon— . . . .
. . . . . . be valuable 1n planning of other international endeavors
s1b111ty of phys1c1ans, and should always be delib— of corn arable ro ortions and corn leXit
erated upon and ﬁnalized by physicians. MMPB is p p p p y.
therefore determined to make every effort to achieve
. . . . References
ﬁnal and satisfactory conﬂict resolution at 1ts level,
and t0 avo1d referral .Of medlcal de01s1ons to higher [1] Agreement between the United States of America and the
management amhontles- Russian Federation Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes (signed at
. Washington DC on June 17, 1992, proclaimed on June 17,
5. Conclusmn 1992).
[2] International Space Station Bilateral Memoranda of Un—
The ﬁrst four decades Of human space ﬂight were lead derstanding at (www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/
. . _ - elements/nasa_rsa.html) (last accessed June 17, 2008).
by tWO (llVCI‘SC natlcfns’ the US and USSR’ eachdoing [3] K.A. Souza, EA. Ilyin, Major Results from Biological
things differently With regard to operational act1V1t1es, Experiments in Space, in Space Biology and Medicine, Vol.
management and processes related to maintaining hu— 3, Humans in Spaceﬂight (1996), Book 1, Part 1, Biological
man presence in space. The Soviets had a permanent Effects of GraVity, Section 2, pp- 31-61-
presence and the Americans had a reusable spacecraft. [4] AB. Nlcogoss1an, O.G. Gazenko, AII.’ Grlgoriev, S.R. Mohler
The fundamental o erational activities were different (Eds')’ Space bIOIOgy and medlcme’ Jomt US_RUSSIan
. p ’ Publication in ﬁve volumes, Publishers AIAA for USA, and
yet when combined they were complementary. The 188 Nauka Press for Russia, 19944004
Program has become a platform where nations of dif— [5] AB. Nicogossian, Transitioning from Spacelab to the
ferent culture, different language, and different styles International Space Station, ESA Special Publication SP—433,
are working together to build a large integrated complex December 1998' _
. . . [6] LB. Kozlovskaya, Countermeasures for long—term space ﬁlghts.
research fac111ty 1n space. .
. . . Lessons learned from the Russ1an space program, Journal of
This effort could not have been accomplished w1th— Gravitational Physiology 9 (1) (2002) 313.
out the legendary work by each space faring nation [7] V.V. Morgun, L.I. Voronin, R.R. Kaspranskiy, S.L. Pool,
[12—15] Human presence in space is now dependent M.R. Barratt, OHL Navinkov, DCVClOmeHt Of US—Russian
upon multiple partners. Achieving the goals Of tO— medlcal support proceduresfor long—duratlon spaceﬁlght: the
d h been accom lished b 60 16 Of all walks 0 f NASA—Mn exper1ence, AV1at1on, Space, and EnV1ronmental
W as . . p . y 1? p . Medicine 73 (2) (2002) 147—155.
hfe- The ablhty t0 prov1de medlcal care to those 11V"" [8] V.V. Bogomolov, G.I. Samarin, Medicalhealth and performance
ing on the 188 has been created out of multinational care on orbital station Mir, in: Orbital Station Mir Space

"
"10","612 A1. Grigoriev et al. / Acta Astronautica 65 (2009) 603—612
Biology and Medicine. 2001, V01. 1, Medical Care in Long International Space Station crews—15th Humans in Space
Term Space Flight, pp. 20—41. Symposium. Beneﬁts of Human Presence in Space. Historical,

[9] International Space Station Intergovernmental Agreement, scientiﬁc, medical, cultural, and political aspects. Graz, Austria,
Treaty signed January 29, 1998 by the parties. 22—26 May 2005, Book of Abstract, pp. 236—237.

[10] L.F.H. Cline, G. Gibbs, Re—negotiation 0f the International [13] IA. Jones, S. Roden, J. Schmid, S. Hart, E. Powers,
Space Station Agreements, 1993—1997, Acta Astronautica 53 T. Taddeo, J.D. Polk, D. Hamilton, J.M. Duncan, Space
(11) (2003) 917—925. medicine association news: International Space Station medical

[11] CL. Fischer, V.V. Bogomolov, A.E. Sargsyan, Management of operations, Aviation Space and Environment Medicine 79 (6)
the International Space Station (188) system of joint medical (2008) 646—647.
support, Presented at Aerospace Medical Association (ASMA) [14] LB. Kozlovskaya, Al. Grigoriev, Russian system of
74th Annual Scientiﬁc Meeting, San Antonio, TX, USA, May countermeasures on board of the International Space Station
5—9, 2003. (188): the ﬁrst results, Acta Astronaut 55 (2004) 233—237.

[12] V.V. Bogomolov, Al. Grigoriev, LB. Kozlovskaya, The Russian [15] AB. Nicogossian, D. Pober, The future of space medicine,
experience in medical care and health maintenance of the Acta Astronautica 49 (2001) 3—10.

"
