"","x"
"1","The Use 0fArt1ﬁc1alMuscles 1n Space Sult Slmulatlon for
Partlal GraVIty Experlmentatlon and Tralnlng
J essica Edmonds Duda Dava J . Newman J effrey Hoffman
Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation Massachusetts Institute Of Technology Massachusetts Institute Of Technology
1 Broadway 12th Floor 77 Massachusetts Ave. 33-307 77 Massachusetts Ave. 37-227
Cambridge, MA 02142 Cambridge, MA 02139 Cambridge, MA 02139
617-500-0552 617-258-8799 617-452-2353
jduda@aur0ra.aer0 dnewman@mit. edu jhcffmal @mit. edu
J ames Peverill Gail P. Perusek
Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation NASA Glenn Research Center, MS 77-7
1 Broadway 12th Floor 21000 Brookpark Road
Cambridge, MA 02142 C1eve1and,OH 44135
617-500-4808 216-433-8729
jpeveri11@aur0ra.aer0 gai1.p.perusek@nasa.gcv
Abstract—The Aurora/MIT project team has developed a metabolic cost of movement when wearing a space suit, it is
knee joint prototype for a space suit simulator that is necessary for suits to be worn during many aspects of
designed to be lower weight and forIn-factcr than previous astronaut training and land-based research. Using actual
simulators, while mimicking the resistive properties to space suits outside of underwater neutral buoyancy
human motion that pressurized space suits necessarily environments is problematic due to the expense, bulk,
impose. Speciﬁcally, we employed “artiﬁcial muscle” weight, and difﬁculty in donning/dofﬁng. The goal of this
pneumatic actuators to actively control the joint torques for project is to demonstrate a novel method for simulating
any given limb angle, in order to closely reproduce the non- space suit joint torques, which are n0n-1inear and vary with
linear hysteretic relationship and also allow for tuning of the angular position. Previous attempts at space suit torque
joint to mimic any space suit design. For this initial simulation have used passive resistance (springs, dampers);
feasibility study, we tested the prototype 0n MIT’s Robotic however, to afford a multitude of design Options without
Space Suit Tester (RSST) with an example control scheme, requiring additional hardware, we instead utilize actively
intended to emulate NASA’s Extravehicular Mobility Unit controlled resistance. Our novel method will allow for
(EMU) space suit. Testing indicated that the t0rque-vs.- development of a full space suit simulator for land-based
angle relationship of the prototype knee mimics that Of the applications, which mimics the joint torques and resulting
EMU knee with 15%, ranging from -12 to 25 Nm (the EMU reduced mobility to a high level of ﬁdelity, while offering
torque range is -8 to 29 Nm). Results from this preliminary characteristics of lighter weight, lower proﬁle, and
design and the associated testing suggest that a full-bcdy portability.
actively-ccntrclled space suit simulator may accurately
emulate the properties of multiple space suitsﬁ2 Aurora Fllght SCiCDCCS, together Wlth the MIT Man-Vehicle
Laboratory, have developed a new concept for a wearable
extravehicular actiVity space suit simulator (EVA S3) that
TABLE OF CONTENTS imitates the mechanical properties of various space suits and
can be used in microgravity or partial gravity extravehicular
1.INTRODUCTION.................................................................1 EVA) 6X erimentaticn and trainin Currentl we have
2. KNEE PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT 3 ( p . g. . y
3. CONCLUSIONS 8 developed a hlgh'leyel con.ceptual deSIgn for the full bOdy
EVA S3, and a detailed des1gn and prototype of the EVA S3
knee JOlnt.
BIOGRAPHIES 9
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS......................................................10 The concept for the EV A S3 consists of adjustable
excskeletcn components, sized to ﬁt various
anthropometries, which overlay the relevant joints (upper
1- INTRODUCTION body: elbow, shoulder, trunk; lower body: hip, knee, ankle).
P - - - - - - This concept does not include a design for the hand.
ressurized space suits impose high JOlnt torques 0n the . .
wearer, reducing mobility for upper and lower body M0untec1t0theex0ske1et0n components at each 0ftheJc1nts
- - - - we pr0V1de high-ﬁdehty emulation of the space suit JOlnt
motions. Because Of the highly altered mobility and , , , ,
torques, which account for most of the distinguishable
mechanical properties of the space suit and are thus the most
1 important element of a space suit simulator in terms of
978-1-4244-7351-9/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE . . .
2IEEEACpapei#1283,Version1,UpdatedOct0be1r26,2010 res1stance to human motion (as well as metabolic cost).
1

"
"2","McKibben actuators [1] (also known as artiﬁcial pneumatic allows the subject to be loaded to varying levels of
muscles) are used to actively control joint resistance simulated microgravity) and the Active Response Gravity
torques. They are cylindrical pneumatic actuators, Ofﬂoad System (ARGOS — a suspension system With a
constructed of ﬂexible rubber With an inextensible weave, harness supporting part of the subject’s weight); see Figure
that contract longitudinally When pressurized. As the 2. It may also be used in ﬁeld simulation activities or
actuator is pressurized, joint torque is increased. The desired potentially underwater in neutral buoyancy simulations.
relationship between joint torque and angle is determined
from experimental data obtained in previous Extravehicular
Mobility Unit (EMU) suit tests at MIT (see Previous work .
and requirements, below) and is captured in the control / ‘ \
algorithm. The relationship between joint torque and f O “V
actuator input pressure was determined experimentally ""‘ I""
during the course of this work. An integrated pneumatic ) .ﬁ
and electronic control system is located external to the joint. / - . \
By actively controlling torque for any given joint angle the .V‘
design closely mimics the torque vs. angle curves of any ‘IVAV‘V
given space suit. Active control also facilitates adapting the i ‘-
EVA S3 system to mimic multiple (and future) space suit . I H
characteristics very effectively and efﬁciently, requiring ‘ _ i _
only a simple software modiﬁcation. A conceptual drawing I ' a
of our proposed space suit simulator, EVA S3, is shown in l v .. /
Figure l. - - g'i'ai ' f; .1'
We expect that the EVA S3 Will be used in ground-based Figure 1, Conceptual drawing of the EVA S3 full body
simulation activities, including the enhanced Zero-graVity space suit simulator with McKibben actuators shown in
Locomotion Simulator (GZLS — a vertical treadmill that blue, and photo of various sizes of McKibben actuators,
.{ {ix ’ ' L“ I n
"" 55, . ~s— .' f1
\\\ l A , Uw/I
l a a ‘1 - ‘ ,2 g ,» ‘ J_—
\ \w ""ape I; a
4'"" 1‘32” 3 ‘ w
‘. 1-,. ii???” iii 7: ' f5 : .
._i.-i';.jf'_,w"" “ﬁﬁﬁiwﬁ . ' :1 I"" ' - .
'I [Q 12;}; 9.1:"" i: . . ' 'ﬁi} “ .n. 1"""" _ , .
. . .. . “Q ‘ a_ﬁiﬁ‘} - :I. r . . .. _. _ ;
m” a . ~ - - n1.
., . l- ' ‘ ﬂ .3 I ﬁn.
eZLS vertical treadmill ' 7- -
ARGOS hlp glmbal f, 5
suspension system 1 5 ‘
Figure 2. Upper left: Lunar Task Simulation on the enhanced Zero-g Locomotion Simulator (eZLS); lower right:
Active Response Gravity Ofﬂoad System (ARGOS) partial gravity simulation system. NASA photos.
As a proof of concept, we developed a prototype knee joint knee joint and testing of the associated prototype, and high-
and tested in on MIT’s Robotic Space Suit Tester (RSST), a level conceptual design for a multi-aXis space suit simulator
full-size anthropometric robot With instrumented joints for the entire body. This program was performed under
capable of measuring torque and angle. In this document, funding from a NASA Small Business Innovation Research
we Will discuss previous work to characterize joint torque (SBIR) Phase 1 contract.
properties of the EMU space suit, selection of a joint torque
simulation device, design of a single-aXis simulator for the
2

"
"3","2. KNEE PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT cylinder actuators were examined, but in general tend to be
. . quite heavy and bulky for the amount of force required for
PVQWOMS WOVk and requzrements this application. Additionally, the linear expansion of the
The ﬁrst required task was to obtain relevant space suit joint cylinder means that the torque applied to the joint is quite
torques, in order to properly simulate them using the EVA low when the limb is straight. Electrical actuators were also
S3. We obtained a data set from Professor Newrnan’s examined, such as servo motors. The amount 0f torque
studies which were previously performed at MIT using an needed WOUid require the use Of a gearbox for this
EMU space suit pressurized to 30 kPa (4.3 psi), tested on application. Again, this WOUid result in a very bulky and
the RSST, to quantify speciﬁc joint torques [2,3,4]. MIT’s heavy design, and the packaging WOUid be quite difﬁCUit- A
data has been processed to remove torque due to the weight gearbox driven mechanism is also undesirable since the
Of the robot. mechanism would be fairly inefﬁcient when back driving.
This would mean that the motor would need to be very
Selection of the appropriate joint torque hardware for our accurately controlled to not impose a great deal of additional
proposed EVA S3 required that we determine major joint resistance t0 motion 011 the user.
Characteristics: the presence of hysteresis, the minimum and
maximum torques and angles, whether or not negative After examining numerous types 0f actuators, a unique
torque values were present at certain angles, and the general solution was selected for incorporation into the joint designs
shape Of the torque vs. angle curves. These general based on weight, form factor and versatility. The MeKibben
characteristics, and in particular the rninirnurn/rnaxirnurn actuator (Figure 1) is a type 0f pneumatic actuator which
torques and angles (range Of motion) f0r each Of the joints, consists of rubber tubing that contracts longitudinally under
were extracted from the MIT data. We gathered and air pressure. It is also known as an “artiﬁcial pneumatic
processed data for the shoulder, elbow, trunk, hip, knee, and muscle”. The air pressure expands the tubing radially,
ankle, though we used only the knee data for comparison in which is wrapped With a braided ﬁber-reinforeernent
our development of the knee prototype. See Figure 3. This covering. The geometry Of this reinforcement causes the
data provides the limits of joint angle (3 to 103 degrees) and tubing to contract in length as it expands radially. The force
joint torque (-8 to 29 Nm) required f0r our initial space suit output is very constant throughout the travel of the actuator.
knee joint simulator design. The curve shows torque These actuators have a number of unique advantages for this
responses for various ranges of motion (interrnediate traces application. They are available in any desired length, and
between top and bottom curves), exemplifying the are ﬂexible so they can conform around irregular surfaces.
hysteresis in the system. They are very lightweight, and can be easily backdriven
since they essentially behave as a variable rate spring.
Knee Flexion
30’ 7' W t"" ,7“ The MeKibben actuators are driven through high-speed
25 // J ‘ solenoids, capable of inﬁnitely varying the pressure to the
g 20 , jx’j actuators over the travel of the limb. This provides the
7g 15 _, -""'""J , /_/ a capability to mimic Virtually any torque vs. angle
E M »/""'i:/‘/ relationship. We used miniature solenoids and associated
,5 10 .. "" /. //4jééﬁ5” ‘ pneumatic control products for this purpose; an encoder
“:3 5 _ ' ///‘%f¢ ‘ senses the position of the limb and a control system sets the
:2, 0 f“ H 1 pressure and resultant reaction torque of the actuator.
is H , . A ' . . . ' , ' , ""\M 4, In deciding to use actively controlled resistance devices, we
400 20 4o 60 80 100' 120 acknowledged the requirement for power, a controller, and
Knee F'eXion Ang'e (deg) (in the ease of these pneumatic actuators) an air supply. For
Figure 3° EMU Knee ﬂexion torque vs. angle curve, MIT eZLS and ARGOS simulation activities, we believe the test
data [51- Inset: knee ﬂexion (ki) convention — arrow set-up is conducive to these peripherals. For ﬁeld testing,
indicates positive angle and positive torque. we believe that all required components (with the possible
exception of the air supply) can be miniaturized such that
Torque Simulation methodology the test subject can wear them in a backpack. Air can be
prov1ded either by tanks worn on the subject’s back, or a
Several tprS Of dCVlCCS were investigated fOI' USC in the larger tank 01' air compressor carried by a trolley.
knee joint simulator design. Originally we proposed the use
of magnetorheologieal (MR) ﬂuids, which, like MeKibben Assuming conservative efﬁciency, we ﬁnd that a suit
actuators, are actively controlled. This methodology was simulator requiring 24 pneumatic actuators could be
discarded primarily due to concerns about the simulation powered for approximately 17 rnin given 30 cycles per
ﬁdelity: MR ﬂuids simulate darnper-like properties very minute (equivalent to a slow walk), with the subject wearing
well, but are not as appropriate to simulate spring-like
qualities, which is the dominant Characteristic of current
gas-pressurized space suit joints. Pneumatic piston type
3

"
"4","three lightweight composite air tanks3. Our calculations
assume a conservative cycle efﬁciency (20%). We believe
the efﬁciency may be higher, since (1) the system only uses
air during changes in angular velocity, and (2) the materials
used for the McKibben actuators, rubber, is inherently
efﬁcient. Efﬁciency is a multiplicative factor, so increasing
efﬁciency to 40% would double the operating time. Given
these conservative preliminary calculations and the many
commercially available types of air tanks, we think it likely
that the stored air can be carried by the subject for ﬁeld
simulation activities.
Preliminary design McKihben actuator McKibben aetuator
to resnst extensnon to resust ﬂeXIOl'I
A conceptual layout of the knee joint with the McKibben
actuators is shown in Figure 4. The loads provided by the . . . .
actuators are accommodated by a close-ﬁtting rigid Flgure 4‘ Conceptual layout of knee Jomt. McKlbben
exoskeleton (in this case a COTS knee brace). As shown, actuators are shown 1n red and blue.
both actuators — one to resist ﬂeXion, and the other to resist
extension — are located on the outside, or lateral side of the As described previously, the characteristic of the EV A
knee. Because the actuator only operates in one direction, S3 design that signiﬁcantly improves simulation ﬁdelity
the use of two actuators and a directional guide (spool) are compared to other space suit simulator designs is the use
required. In addition to the desired force produeed in the of active control. Previous space suit simulator designs
direction Of bending, the asymmetry Of this des1gn have utilized passive resistance (e.g., linear or rotational
introduces a potentially harmful lateral torque on the knee. springs). These passive devices require the addition of a
Placing the actuators mediolaterally (one on either side of damper to appropriately mimic the hysteresis in the
the knee) would balance the forces and resolve this issue, space suit torque vs. angle relationship and are imperfect
however, the actuator would not ﬁt comfortably on the for simulating the generally non-linear trend. By
inside of the knee without interfering with the other leg. designing EV A S3 joints with controlled actuation, we
Testing was performed in order to address concerns about are able to achieve higher ﬁdelity simulation with no
lateral knee torques resulting from this and is discussed mass penalty. By actively controlling the torque for any
below under Joim‘ characterization test results. given joint angle, we can more Closely mimic the torque
vs. angle curves of any given space suit and adjust the
joint torques for multiple space suits.
3 Assuming 1 cm diameter, 30 cm length, the volume of the actuator is: Kneejoim‘ Simulator pVOtOtj/pe design and development
Vacmm : 7r(radius)2 (length) =2.4><10_2L The ﬁnal inechanical design of the EVA S3 knee joint
Simulator is shown in Figure 5. As described preyiously,
We assume Popemng = 414 kPa (60 psi), and Pmmge = 30,000 kPa (4350 we utilize two McKibben actuators for ﬂeXion and
psi), where Popemn-ng is the operating pressure of the actuators, and Pmyage is extension Of the knee. The SpOOl acts as a lever arm to
the tank Storage pressure' convert the tensile force of the actuators into a torque on
We also assume 30 cycles per minute (e.g. 30 steps per minute for the legs, the joint. The actuators are connected to the brace by a
30 arm swings per minute for the arms). The rate of air consumed is then: SWiVCl mount, tO eliminate stress on the rubber/Inetal
_ V ><[M] interface within the actuator. The guide maintains the
Vcommeweal = “CW: mm = 9.7><10_3 L/min placement of the actuators on the spools. Due to the long
i T: lead time in obtaining the McKibben actuators, we
Divide the rate of air consumed by 0.2 to account for a 20% cycle ordered them before we had the d1mens1ons Of the knee
efﬁciency: brace; therefore we had to add extenders to lengthen the
_ sides of the knee brace to ﬁt the actuators. (This will not
K0nsumed,corrected =4-9><10_2 L/min be needed in the next iteration of the design.) Two
Multiply by 24, assuming that the suit simulator includes 24 actuators: alummum. braCketS WCI‘C des1gned t0 eXtend the brace
and prov1de attachment p01nts for the actuators. The
Vconsumemmz :12 L/min brackets are constructed of 0.125"" (0.32 cm) 6061
aluminum sheet metal cut and bent to the contour of the
Assuming .a three tanks With VOlume Of mege Z 6'7 L’ the time Of leg brace, and are secured to the brace with rivets. The
Simulation 1s: . . . . .
knee brace JOlnt was modiﬁed w1th custom machined
tsimulation : . I/storage ><3 tanks =17.21nin components to incorporate the spool, which is machined
I/consumedJotaZ
4

"
"5","from Delrin plastic. The design also incorporates a ﬂexion and extension actuators. This is important
potentiometer to sense knee angle. because the actuator contraction force is a function
of both internal air pressure and current actuator
length. The desired torque value is used as an input
(*5; i!“ to a function that returns the necessary contraction
4! l! force each actuator must apply that Will result in
the correct torque on the knee joint. The contractile
force of the actuators is converted to this torque by
‘ . the geometry of their mounting locations and the
‘ shape of the spool.
p Extenders
"" x1; Knee brace
i» ll 5 1“ "" .
t. . pun _ .
Figure 5. EVA S3 knee design. 1 ﬂ _
The EVA S3 prototype is shown in Figure 6. - 1-.
The weight of the knee joint prototype is 2.4 kg, including -. J
the knee brace, actuators, spool, and all the brackets, nuts, ‘. j
and bolts that connect them. This does not include the ' _ ' .
weight of valves or air hoses/ﬁttings, but these components a I ‘- . SIS ﬂEmm-l
are secured externally. ' ' . . I
_‘ - . _ ‘. F: Resists extension
Space suit Simulator controller design and development I J; T‘ . - 15-;- |.-'1 ”J I! -
The controller design and prototype are shown Figure 7. iii}; . . ~‘:‘"" '-
The system is composed of pneumatically controlled
resistive actuators coupled to solenoid valves and a digital Figure 6. Prototype knee joint simulator
control circuit to achieve variable, repeatable, and accurate
simulation of a Wide range of potential suit properties. The
actuators use the input 0f angle (provided by the installed The microcontroller outputs this desired state into a PID
potentiometer) and pressure measurements to determine the (proportional integral differential) control loop that
appropriate pressurization. continuously monitors actuator pressure sensors and outputs
short pulses to the actuator solenoid ﬁll and exhaust valves
The knee joint simulator controls torque applied to the knee to obtain the correct pressure.
in the following manner. First, the microcontroller takes
input from the potentiometer to determine knee joint angle. Figure 8 diagrams how the controller uses the look—up table
The knee joint angle is used to compute two pieces of to control input pressures. For example, as the knee ﬂexes
information: the controller initiates pressurization 0f the ﬂexion
resistance actuator and depressurization 0f the extension
0 Desired torque at current angle iS interpolated from resistance actuator. For initial testing, we did not program
a table of data (“look—up table”) speciﬁc to the the controller to emulate the hysteretic property of the knee
desired suit characteristics. (Future controller joint; rather, the look—up table provided one torque for any
designs Will be able to store multiple suit data given angle.
proﬁles, allowing any number of suit torque
response characteristics to be simulated.)
o A simple geometric model of the knee brace and
McKibben actuator endpoint mounting locations is
used to compute the current lengths of both the
5

"
"6","ATMEGA 640
Microcontroller . E“°T=f.’f’3£fé”a‘°'
‘ Desired Pressure
/ 222322;:“533 —-> 1—»
Knee Brace 355.1“- Extension Actuate!
Knee Angle Sensor Geometry Emaus‘ va‘ve
(potentiometer) i
g DesiretiTorque (2:5):52 25535;?) . Flegﬁlnvzwéator
50 ’. . a .
I 3 ::r\ -7 IV : Flexuon Actuator
kc ~ _. ,2?“ ExhauslVaIve
. E (""7;
_§ 5 032
E E 0- ‘y
s ' 5“-
; $€ Flexion Actuator J
”W A"" 7 v ‘M I
Figure 7. Controller design for the actuated space suit simulator knee. Controller prototype is shown as framed
subset in lower left.
2.: rotation of the knee) of the EVA S3 knee joint meets the
,1 a“ lateral side of the RSST. This position was chosen because
a 93"" w, it is the point of highest load: all the reaction forces from
. ‘ A . . o
2 “.f “low“ 1“: any lateral torque pass through th1s pomt. Durlng the test,
‘8' 90%“ y the actuators were pressurized to 414 kPa (60 psi), which is
' _J‘ , . .
E. ~: “5:?” “f-rl .H“ WM“ 70% of then rated maX1mum. The test was conducted at a
g .. a [LM/“es WW fully extended position to represent the worst loading
* ; x . .
[-I — *1 Eagles” :1 scenario for p0ss1ble lateral torque.
: _ __ 'c-
..; a i 3m 40 w Wig“? 1qu
..: ‘ . RSST control
Angle (deg) ‘9/5"", f”? computer
5:5""? —:.:=...~ -
Figure 8. Controller actuation representation for the ‘- a v, ‘ Angle
knee joint simulator (FR=ﬂeXi0n resistance actuator grigﬁiﬁ on! m EVA S3 lmee
located anterior to the knee, ER=extensi0n resistance ""1“ Kg- / JOIDtCOIl’IfOllef
actuator located posterior to the knee). §
Joint characterization test description ~. - )2; $\ Pneumatic controls
. _ _ _ _ ' Po‘tcntiomctcf 'v-u (avalveslpressure sensors)
The EVA S3 knee JOlnt s1mulat0r characterlzation test set up A
is shown in Figure 9. In addition to the controller, the knee f . _ _ ‘ J Jflim”?
joint required its own pneumatic components. For the 4 , \1‘ -. :35”
prototype, we used pressure sensors with external readouts - . 7 I \\ M C . H d ,
for troubleshooting, though this will not be required in the ,yorto ‘ 0111:1515)?“ ‘m
ﬁnal version. We used an air compressor for the source air tesista‘eglgtiensioil ' L ' i ' “
for the actuators. The RSST measures both angle and ' “TH"" ’
tor ue, so it allows us to directl com are the results of our . ,
q . . y . p . . Flgure 9. Test Setup at MIT Man-Vehlcle laboratory,
measurements w1th prev10usly obtalned JOlnt (knee) torque , , , , ,
. . . . Including the knee JOlIlt s1mulat0r mounted on the
data. In1t1al testlng was performed to valldate that the lateral ,
RSST, the pneumatlc board, and the controller.
knee torques were acceptable. To measure the forces
involved, a paper-thin pressure sensor sheet was inserted at Joint characterization test results
the oint where the lateral hin e located at the axis of . . . .
p g ( The lateral torque test results 1ndlcated that the knee JOlnt
6

"
"7","simulator transmitted 11.2 Nm of torque to the robot’s knee Controlled resistance test results are shown in Figure 11.
joint. In comparison, lateral knee loads when riding a The controlled resistance data was collected with the ﬂexion
bicycle can reach 30 Nm [6], which places the EVA S3 knee and extension actuators controlled by the software to
torque well within an acceptable range. This test showed provide resistance when required, as n0ti0na11y described
that the lateral torque in our knee joint simulator was not a above in Figure 8. Two plots, including the raw data and the
signiﬁcant issue. Under human use conditions, where the data with the robot weight removed are shown.
stiffness of human tissue is much lower than the plastic shell
of the RSST, it may decrease further. The knee joint simulator test results are compared to MIT’s
EMU knee ﬂexion torque vs. angle curves in Figure 12.
For knee joint simulator testing, we ﬁrst collected baseline
data for two separate conditions (Figure 10). Initially, we
collected baseline torque data for a simple sinusoidal knee (a)
motion from the robot alone, not wearing the EVA S3 knee 50 Controlled Resistance
simulator — in this case, torque is due to gravity. Next we
attached the knee brace t0 the robot and collected baseline 40 Controlled knee ._’”
data with the robot wearing the brace with unpressurized ”1:265:12?” \ 1p}; 1
actuators. The addition of the brace alone provided both 30 ’1/ ll . ..
torque and hysteresis as shown (Figure 10a). Next we tested E 20 I, --’ "" . x’f-NA‘
knee motion against statically pressurized actuators to f g 11.1,? V’T’V‘"" ' "" W”
observe the properties of the actuators when not controlled 3 10 i; '_ :3 '."" «V
(Figure 10b). 0 ”,3, ' ‘
.3: .ﬁwru/P‘
l' i: . / RSST only; no brace
(a) .10 £11""
Unpressurized brace ‘
50
.200 20 40 60 80 100 120
40 Knee Flexmn Angle (degrees)
30 . ” W 5 (b)
Unpressurized brace 7“: f ‘ a Controlledresistance,robotweightsubtracted
,_. ‘ .‘J. . J; ‘ , ‘1‘? ~*- _ 50
3 {I ' = 1. - 40
E 10 . ~ -'»’~.'.:._'
“ "" aw
owﬁwkin em
I' 1E? ‘ ' ’ RSST only; no brace ‘73”
40 E 20
i E 10
.20 LL
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 g
Knee FlexionAngle(degrees) i D
(b)
Statically pressurized brace '10
50
I200 20 40 60 8C] 100 120
40 _ Knee Flexion Angle (deg)
139 kPa (20 pSI)
30 276 kPa (40 psi) ,,
A [.447 yr, 1] Figure 11. EVA S3 Knee joint simulator knee ﬂexion
.5. 20 [9,71 ,-,- - V . , "" torque vs. angle curves a) raw data (in red; robot weight
g 10 /f/ i f . Unpressurized shown in orange) b) With robot weight removed.
(“I ‘4
U ‘n' ”M , . . . .
Ir; II"" Jomt characterzzatzon dzscusszon
An i We note the fortuitous result that the unpressurized EVA S3
.20 knee joint (Figure 10a) nearly results in the desired EMU
U 20 40 60 80 100 120 . . .
KneeFlexionAnglewegrees) t0rque-vs.-ang1e curve, and that pressur1z1ng and actively
controlling the joint (Figure 11a) makes very little
Figure 10. Baseline torque vs. angle data. (21) Orange = difference in this case (the primary effect is an increase in
RSST robot only, blue = RSST wearing knee brace with the torque at high angles). The fact that hysteresis is present
unpressurized actuators. (b) Knee motion with in all cases in which the robot was wearing the brace is due
resistance provided by statically pressurized actuators. t9 hrace shppage over the knee S surface, Pr9ducmg a very
No software control is used in either of these cases. snn11ar effect to the fabric Of a space suit, Wthh also
produces hysteresis. The fact that the width of the
7

"
"8","hysteresis closely matches that of the EMU hysteresis 0 There was some mechanical interference in the
(approximately 5-10 Nrn — Figure 12) iS coincidental; active brace itself, Speciﬁcally9 during testing we
control allows us to increase or decrease this effect. One observed that during high angles of ﬂeXion, the
should realize that (a) for other joints (e.g. elbow, ankle, spool on the knee brace folded in towards the
hip) we are unlikely to observe the same fortuitous posterior of the knee.
occurrence» and ('3) f9” other space W5 (e-g- Mark 111) the The issues listed above will be addressed in future work by
torque-vs.-angle relationships are dlfferent than the EMU? optimizing the controller and its software, and re-designing
and .the unpressurlzed curve seen 1n. Flgure 103 W111 the knee joint such that the McKibben actuators are in line
certairily not match that 9f other space su1ts. The advantage with the hinge. This will also reduce the lateral torque on
of actively controlled Jomts torques is that they allow each the knee.
Jomt to be tuned to match any given space suit, including
both angle and torque range, as well as the extent of the Top level Space suit Simulator design
hysteresis - in the case of the EMU knee joint, the EVA S3 _ _ _
joint simply did not require a great amount of tuning. The conceptual des1gn for a full—body EVA S3 is shown in
Figure 1. Based on the prototype knee Jomt des1gn and top-
Knee Flexion level weight estimates for the other joints, the weight of the
30 a EVA S3 suit is estimated to be only 25% of the weight of
/ "" the EMU Class III space suit. A conservative weight
25 Actual EMU data Kt estimate for the EVA S3 is 28 kg (61 lbs — Table 1) as
g 20 \ 7/2/13 compared to 113 kg (250 lbs) [7,8] of the EMU Class III
e. V 1 T ' space suit. This total system weight includes the pressure
§- 15 f _ , “”’ l , control system and three air cylinders worn as a backpack.
£1 / // This represents a signiﬁcant improvement in portability,
1° , ’2 / ..;’:;;¢ii«~’ usability, and logistics during simulation activities. Note
3 5 ‘ 5/]? 23%;? that if portability were not a priority (e.g. in laboratory
u. ,V _ training/sirnulation), the subject could use a long tether to a
g 0 I” ‘ larger air tank or air compressor if desired, and not be
' ' required to carry it. This would reduce the estimated weight
'5 . EVA 83 km"" data ofthe EVA s3 (as worn by the subject) to 20 kg (44 lbs).
100 2° Kn‘g Flexio‘goAngle (329) 10° 120 Table 1: Estimated* total system weight of the EVA S3.
@E--m
Figure 12. Comparison Of EVA S3 test results With lJppe'Body
MIT’s EMU knee ﬂexion torque vs. angle curve; our
EVA S3 data (red) overlays MIT’s EMU data (blue). -----
S'mu ato' .‘Irol'ol'ype
weight
A‘Ikle 1.? kg 1.? kg 7.4 kg 5.3 Ins assu‘ned 1;""?
Thus, we observe that the EVA S3 knee data follows the -----
baseline (MIT EMU) data well, with several notes: '------
Lower nndy fatal: 11 kg (74 ha}

0 Vertical offset is likely due to an error in software :hlmsrylmfn"":(1:10:91 Z: 3177':
programming; speciﬁcally, we had t0 tune the
relationship between actuator pressure and torque
generated. Even if the look—up table COI‘I‘CCtly *All weights are conservative estimates. Values are based on the weight of
listed the torque fOI‘ every given angle, the pressure our initial prototype of the EVA S3 knee joint, and the weight of the
. . . prototype pneumatzc control board. The azr tank wezght represents a
input may not have correctly resulted in the des1red sample vendor.
torque.

o The “chatter” in the EVA S3 data is likely due to 3, CONCLUSIONS
several factors. First, the controller software was _ _
not optimized. Second, there was some time lag in we developed a des1gn and part1al prototype Of a novel
the pressure sensor. That is, the pressure sensor space su1t simulator (EVA. S3), us1ng active. control to
read the actuator pressure and corrected it, but the accurately s1rnulate space .su1t Jomt torques, which are non-
response time for this correction (in both the liriear and .Vary w1th pos1tion: The primary oontributlon of
pressure sensor and the solenoid actuators) resulted this work is the use of McKibben actuators 1n Jomt torque
in noisy pressure output. This can be improved by generatlon.
iliaelvelsewlgiha aﬁzlglsmgﬁ?ytu:3:tgglteheﬂgrés:3: This program resultecl in a c1etailed desigri and prototype of

’ the EVA S3 knee Jomt, us1ng two McKibben actuators to
control system.
8

"
"9","provide resistance to extension and ﬂexion. We designed [3] Dava Newman. ""Quantifying Astronaut Tasks: Robotic
the prototype to emulate the joint torques obtained from Technology and Future Space Suit Development,"" Final
MIT testing of the NASA EMU space suit. In designing the Report under NASA Grant NAG9—1089, 2003.
knee joint, maintaining light weight and low forIn-factor
were considered high priority. [4] Patricia Schmidt, Dava Newman, and Edward Hodgson,
""Modeling Space Suit Mobility: Applications to Design and
We tested the knee prototype 0n MIT’s Robotic Space Suit Operations,"" AIAA and SAE International Conference on
Tester (RSST) t0 (1) identify the potentially dangerous Environmental Systems §ICES 2001 1, Orlando, FL, July
lateral torques imposed on the knee, and (2) verify the 2001.
simulator’s ﬁdelity to the EMU joint torques. We measured
the lateral joint torques to be at low, safe levels of 11.2 Nm. [5] Patricia Schmidt. WWW
Full testing of the actively controlled EVA S3 knee joint MMWHID Thesis,
resulted in a t0rque-vs.—angle proﬁle that is qualitatively MIT Department ofAeronautics and Astronautics, 2001-
similar to the EMU knee joint t0rque-vs.—angle previously _ _ _ _
measured. The EVA S3 knee torques were approximately [6] M- EUCSOD- W-
5_10 Nm lower than the EMU knee torques, and the data Scandinavian Journal of Rehabilitation and Medicine
was somewhat noisy. We believe the torque offset is due to Supplement, V-16 p.1—43, 1986-
an error in the software programing, and the “chatter” in , ,
the data is due to the software having not been optimized, [7], ILC Dover, Inc. Space Suit Evolution: From Custom
and perhaps mechanical interference as well. These issues Tailored to Off—The-Rack, 1994'
hNill be addressed in the next iteration of the EVA S3 joint [8] Richard Wilde. EMU _ A Human Spacecraft.
es1gn. Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Space
Some limitations to the prototype developed in this initial Technology and Sezenee. Tokyo, Japan. pp. 1565'76' 1984'
study must be noted. Hysteresis was not built into the
control scheme (though it is seen to some effect, due to BIOGRAPHIES
friction between the joint anti the RSST.): .As stated above, Jessica Duda is a senior research
the controller was not optimized — for initial testing, it was S e 1' en tiS t at Aurora Fligh t Seienees’
tuned in real-tnnetto best mimic the EMU. J0111t properties. R es e ar eh and D ev el 0pm ent C ent er
F1nally, the ﬁrst-lteratlon mechanical des1gn .Of the knee in Cambridge, M A. Sh e is currently
resulted 1n undes1rable moveinent 0f the JOIIIt over the serving asprinez'palinvestigatorfor
surface of the RSST. These limitations Will be addressed in thr e e N A S A SBIR ,S, and is a etiv e in
longer—term, more comprehensive. follow—on work. other programs r an gin g from the
However, we nete that there are Signiﬁcant advantages to N A S A N + 3 subsonic ﬁxed win g
rapidly prototyping a novel concept. In this case, McKibben aircraft program t 0 A W or a ,S small
actuators had not preV10usly been tested in this applicatlon; U A S d ev e Z 0pm ent, as w e [I as
our worl< not only proved the Ieas1b1hty Of these actuators company business development activities. She received her
for application as a space suit s1mulat01j, bet also. proved the BA. and BS. fr 0 m Northw e st em University, and M S. and
feas1b111ty of active control for space suit Simulation. PhD. from the Massachusetts Institute Of Technology in
Follow—on work will focus on development of a full EVA 2008’. where She studzed artzﬁezal gravzty mm“, mm
. . . . . . . exerezse as a countermeasure t0 Spaceﬂzght-related
S3 for partial graV1ty Simulation and testing. Spe01ﬁcally, it h . Z . Z d d't' .
will be designed for use in the eZLS and ARGOS test p ”‘0 Ogle“ 660"" ”Omng'
facilities, and for ﬁeld testing. In addition, we will simulate
other space suits, to prove the use of active control when the “x Dava Newman is the Margaret
joint characteristics eXhibit greater non-linearity and "" MaeViear Faculty Fellow
hysteresis than the EMU. ‘ . Professor of Aeronautics and
""' i Astronautics and Engineering
1..., Systems at MIT and the Director of
REFERENCES ‘ ’ MIT’s T eehnology and Policy
[l] Chou, C. and Hannaford, B. “Measurement and \ \ Program. She received her BS.
Modeling of McKibben Pneumatic Artiﬁcal Muscles,” IEEE ,t . - \‘_ degreefmm the University ofNotre
Transactions on Robotics and Automation, v.12, no.5, pp. \ l \ Dame, two SM degreesfmm MIT,
90-102, 1996. and her PhD. in Aerospace
Biomedical Engineering from MIT. Her current research
[2] Dava Newman, Patricia Schmidt, and Edward efforts include: advanced Space suit design, dynamics and
HOngOD- ""A Model Of Space SUit Joint Mobility With control of astronaut motion, mission analysis, and
Applications to EVA Operations"", NASA Bioastronautics engineering systems design and policy analysis, She also
Investigators' Workshop, Galveston, TX, January 2001.
9

"
"10","has ongoing efforts in assistive technologies to augment during treadmill exercise, for improved mechanical loading
human locomotion here on Earth. and musculoskeletal health in space.
??WV’: -. .f ‘. 3; Jeffrey Hoffman is Professar 0f the ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
‘3"" 9 I '1"": ‘ Practice Of Aerospace Engineerihg The authors Wish to acknowledge funding Via NASA Small
0 t m the D ep ar tment 0f Aeronaatics Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 contract
if} 13' .' and Astronautics at MIT' He IS a (NNXlOCD23P). The authors also Wish to acknowledge
‘ - former NASA astranaut who has Mr. Andre DeVitt and Mr. Michael Price (Aurora Flight
“Ex ‘ L _ made ﬁve space ﬂights, becoming Sciences), Mr. Forrest Meyen (University of Missouri), and
Y"" -‘-‘ , the ﬁ'fSt as t]? onaut t0 [0g 1000 hours Mr. Roedolph Opperman (MIT), Who assisted in the robotic
(-- J 0f ﬂlght time aboard the Space testing and controller programming for the EVA S3 knee
, 1 Shuttle. He has performed fOW joint. Finally, the authors would like to thank Mr. David
“ ‘ spacewalks, _ includihg .the ﬁrst Brown of Brown University, Who developed the prototype
unplanned, contingency spacewalk in NASA S history (STS drawings, and was responsible for much of the fabrication
51D; April, 1985) and the initial repair/rescue mission for and assembly.
the Hubble Space T elescope (ST S 61; December, 1993). In
August 2001, Dr. Hoffman joined the MITfaculty, where he
teaches courses on space operations, space systems design,
and space policy.
James Peverill is an embedded
systems engineer and program
manager atAurora, with expertise in
mechanical, electrical and software
engineering disciplines. His primary
- areas of interest include high
performance mobile computing
systems and small UA Vs. James is
_ 3L. currently the development team lead
fi'firri-ﬂ - - $_— on Aurora's Skate UAS program.
Previously, Mr. Peverill was program managerfor Aurora's
DARPA F6 effort, and was the lead technical engineer for
the ARES Mars Scout extraction system, on which he led the
development and testing of an extraction system designed to
eject the ARES Mars airplane from its reentry aeroshell.
Gail Perusek is the Project
Manager for Exercise
Countermeasures at NASA Glenn
Research Center in Cleveland, OH.
She serves as subtopic manager for
the Small Business Innovative
Research program in the Crew
Exercise Systems area, under which
the E VA suit simulator project was
funded. She is currently assigned to
the International Space Station (ISS) and Human Research
Project Ofﬁce at NASA Glenn which develops spaceﬂight
payloads for research on the Space Shuttle and the
International Space Station. She has 21 years of experience
with NASA, and holds 2 US Patents. She received her 3.5.
with Distinction in Mechanical Engineering from Ohio
Northern University in 1989 and MS. in Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering from Case Western Reserve
University in 2000 with a focus on Biomechanics. Ms.
Perusek is currently Principal Investigator of an on-orbit
investigation being conducted on the International Space
Station, to improve crew equipment worn by astronauts
10

"
