"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290
g“.'1:g;{;:.;:, Contents IIStS available at SolenceDIrect "" ’
(‘Rééfve‘a 4 13, ‘ .
a A .. ;v:.;~.::"" v‘ﬂfjr-
(,4 ;4 Acta Astronautlca /
*"" r 4"" V , ”55,7353:
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro {m} (3 3‘
—
Global Vlslons for space exploratlon educatlon
Marlene Y. MacLeish 41,4, William A. Thomsonb
a Morehouse School of Medicine, 720 Westview Drive, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA
b Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: The National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI), established in 1997 through a
Received 30 Mareh 2009 National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) competition, is a 12—university
QCCiPtbeld 301$el3tember 2013092009 consortium dedicated to space life science research and education. NSBRI’s Education
w and Public Outreach Program (EPOP) has partnered with Morehouse School of Medicine
Keywords: (MSM) to support NSBRI—NASA’s education mission, which is to strengthen the nation’s
Space education future science workforce through initiatives that communicate space exploration
NSBRI biology research ﬁndings to schools; support undergraduate and graduate programs;
h h 1 f d' . fund postdoctoral fellowshlps, and engage nat10nal ancl 1nternat10nal aud1ences 1n
More ouse SC 00 0. Me lctne collegial exchanges that promote global visions for space exploration education.
Global space educatlon currlculum . . . . . . .
. . Th1s paper descrlbes select MSM—NSBRI—EPOP act1v1t1es, 1nclud1ng scholarly
Educatlon and Pubhc Outreach _ _ _ _ _ _
K—12 space exploration curriculum Interchanges w1th aud1ences 1n Austrla, Canada, France, Ch1na, Greece, Italy,. Scotland
Brain in Space and Spam. The paper also makes the case for a global space exploratlon educatlon v1s10n
Neurolab that inspires students, engages educators and informs general audiences about the
Baylor College of Medicine beneﬁts that space exploration holds for life on Earth.
TeaCher PFOfESSiOHal dEVEIOPment © 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Multimedia space education
1. Space education for a global science workforce (STEM) skills required by the next generation to compete
and succeed in a knowledge—driven, borderless world.
1.1. Building on success The MSM—NSBRI—NASA Education and Public Outreach
Program (EPOP) supports US science education reform by
Morehouse School of Medicine (MSM) has partnered [15ng SpaCe exploration as a foundation from Wthh to
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration develop sc1ence teachers; create exc1t1ng classroom C011-
(NASA) and the National Space Biomedical Research In— tent; encourage students at 311 levels to pursue hlgher
stitute (NSBRI) to bring space life science research and space educatlon and careers 1h STEM—related ﬁelds; and estab—
exploration education to thousands of students, educators, hSh Internatlonal partnershlps that promote a shared
and general audiences across the United States (US). This 8101331 V1510h tel“ space exploratlon. These educatlonal
consortium also has engaged international audiences in outreach strategles are supported by the ﬁndlngs 0f the U5
“re—imagining” a collaborative, global, space exploration Natlonal Academy Of Selences report, .Rlsmg Above the
education vision that promotes greater understanding of Gathering Storm: Energlzmg and Employing America fOT Cl
how space exploration beneﬁts society and contributes to Brzghtet Economle Futufe [11- The report reconimends
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics expandlng and re1nforc1ng the U5 talent P001 by 1mpr0v—
ing K—12 education; strengthening US commitment to
long—term basic science research that sustains the “ﬂow of
new ideas;” developing and retaining the “brightest and
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1404756 5706; fax: +14047521043. bESt StUdentS’ SClentISt and englneers from the Us and
E-mail addresses: mmacleish@msm.edu (MY. MacLeish), the rESt Of the world; and ensurlhg that the US 15 the
wthomson@bcm.edu (W.A. Thomson). premier place in Which to innovate [1].
0094—5765/$ —see front matter © 2009 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.09.030.

"
"2","1286 MY. MacLeish, WA. Thomson / Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290

The MSM—NASA—NSBRI—EPOP also supports the mis— Department of Defense, and International Space Agencies
sion of NASA’s Education Strategic Coordination Frame— from Europe, Canada, and Japan to set criteria, select
work: to build strategic partnerships that promote STEM research projects and prepare a shuttle mission, Neurolab
literacy and develop awareness of NASA’s mission by (a) STS—90, dedicated to neuroscience research. This interna—
informing the public about the beneﬁts that space tional mission now provides a model that can help leaders
exploration holds for life on Earth and (b) providing of the ﬂedging discipline of space exploration education to
educational opportunities for scientists, students, and shape policy and forge cooperation among space agencies,
teachers [2]. Other eminent US think tanks share concerns scientists, and others interested in the interface between
about US K—12 science education. These policy makers are space and society.
particularly focused on the education of students from The Neurolab mission, a complex scientiﬁc endeavor
underserved populations, which represent a rapidly that paved the way for the International Space Station’s
growing element of the US populace. For example, the research platform, included educational outreach as an
National Research Council has reported that African integral part of its vision of success. The mission engaged
Americans hold only 2.7% of US PhDs in biomedical teachers,scientists,astronauts,and multimedia organiza—
sciences [3]. Further, the Organization for Economic tions in a joint effort to develop and disseminate
Cooperation and Development’s Programme for Interna— instructional materials that span the educational spectrum.
tional Student Assessment found that 15—year old stu— One resulting product, The Brain in Space: A Teacher’s Guide
dents in the US scored in the middle or lower ranges, with Activities for Neuroscience, has been adapted in US K—12
when compared to their counterparts around the world, curriculums. And the award—wining publication, The
on tests in the subjects of reading, science literacy and Neurolab Spacelab Mission: Neuroscience Research in Space,
mathematics [4]. is a scholarly scientiﬁc reference crafted in a narrative

Analyses such as these are focusing US educational format easily accessible by general audiences [5].
reform on “best practices” that prepare students for full The Neurolab mission also supported an innovative,
participation in a globalized, high technology society. public—private, multimedia partnership that produced a
They also are mobilizing US educators to communicate, television documentary, Exploring Two Frontiers: The Brain
cooperate and collaborate with their international collea— in Space, and interactive websites that present the
gues to develop innovative approaches that improve mission’s scientiﬁc achievements for use in classrooms
learning environments; create curriculums that incorpo— across the globe. A brief description of the global themes
rate global perspectives; and allow students to commu— that have made these educational products enduring
nicate with their peers across the globe, through activities follows.
such as internships and international science competi—
tions. 1.1.2. Global themes for teachers and students

During the past decade, the MSM—NSBRI—NASA—E— The Brain in Space: A Teacher’s Guide with Activities for
POP has evolved from a predominantly kindergarten Neuroscience (Fig. 1) was developed to increase second—
through undergraduate college (K—16) program into a ary teachers’ and students’ understanding of behavioral
more wide—ranging initiative that now includes gradu— and neurological changes that occur during spaceﬂight.
ate and post—graduate elements. This year, it introduced The guide was produced by a multidisciplinary corps
a senior education fellow position, dedicated to research comprised Neurolab scientists and educators from across
and international interchanges related to space explora— the globe. It was ﬁeld—tested by teachers to ensure that
tion education. This paper reports on the successful the contents were developmentally appropriate for
private—public EPOP partnership, with special focus on students, aligned with educational science standards,
activities that have engaged international space educa— and engaging for students.
tion colleagues in a dialogue about space exploration The guide was structured around a narrative that
education. fostered appreciation for (a) the conditions that support

life on Earth; (b) the unique nature of space, including

1.1.1. Towards a global space education community microgravity, free fall, and the engineering and human

Creating a global space education community will challenges of launching humans into space; and (C)
require a concerted effort from space exploration educa— ongoing research into changes that occur when the
tion decision makers to engage teachers, learners and human body leaves Earth’s atmosphere, conducts a space
ordinary citizens in the development of a compelling mission in microgravity, and then returns to Earth. The
vision that recognizes the mutual beneﬁts of preserving Brain in Space guide uses inquiry—based lessons and
planet Earth and also communicates, to diverse audiences, hands—on activities to guide classroom activities, and
how space exploration can help global societies overcome homework suggestions to encourage independent student
21st Century challenges. work. It introduces students to the universality of the

The MSM—NASA—NSBRI collaboration has illustrated scientiﬁc method, and calibrates lessons and activities
the relevance of these concepts over the past decade. The with national science education standards to ensure that
partnership was initiated in 1996 to recognize advances in teachers across the US are able to integrate the activities
neuroscience, and to celebrate the US Presidential labeling into their locally mandated lesson plans.
of the 1990s as The Decade of the Brain. NASA honored the A central goal of The Brain in Space is to communicate a
President’s declaration by partnering with the National global vision that promotes the collaborative nature of
Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation the science and the connectedness of STEM disciplines to

"
"3","MY. MacLeish, WA. Thomson / Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290 1287
a . .. ;_I___T 1.1.4. K— 12 education
‘ ‘ "" "" ”7’"" Ti Cyberspace has provided a cost—effective arena through
The which to reach a large global audience, collect usable data
on how materials are being used, and create innovative,
B RAI N interactive educational opportunities for students at all
_ levels. However, the Internet cannot entirely replace
11’] Space personalized, hands—on, face—to—face experiences that are
A ’Ii'uc‘ht'ré Guidv WithAc'Uym’s fbf vavsc‘k’m? essential for teacher professional development, collegial
7_ ..-- . interchanges, and engagement with students. MSM’s EPOP
km“ . utilizes both approaches to engage K—12 teachers, students
_ _, ’3‘; 5 -. ef- . '? 3. ~ and families in classrooms, museums and science centers,
_ ‘- — 3' wk- 5 '3""? _ ‘4 K i; _ and at national and international meetings.
""v”??‘(K . k i: 1“,»3 Eight educational partners (Baylor College of Medicine,
“5}. ’ ---- - ~--..-.'._ '- -- * ' "" ‘ Colorado Consortium for Earth and Space Science Educa—
- l - tion, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Morehouse
1: . . : ,, School of Medicine, Rice University/The University of Texas
1' 5*. Medical Branch in Galveston, Mount Sinai School of
@ Medicine, and Texas A&M University) have contributed to
the MSM K—16 educational archives. Materials produced by
Fig. 1. MSM_The Bram in Space Teachers Guide this consortium were framed by four major principles:
(1) help teachers to understand space life sciences and
society and the human condition [6]. It informs students change the” practlces t0 iniprove student learning,
about the six space agencies that partnered for the STS 90 (2) Cleve“)? curncular niatenals .that 6(1)an StF‘dentS
mis si 0 n: NASA, th e Eu m p e a n S p a c e Ag e n cy, th e C a na di a n understanding of, and 1nterest in space life sc1ences;
Space Agency, Centre National d—Etudes Spatiales of (3) promote access to, and awareness of sc1ence careers
France, the Deutsches Zentium fur—Und Raumfahrt, and among students andteachers,1nclnd1ng underrepresented
the National Space D evel opment Agency of Japan. The populations; and (4) Increase pubhc/parental awareness of
guide emphasizes the unique nature of this international the real—hfe, Earthjbased lnipacts Of space exploration
collaboration, and reve al e d how “scientists from around through use oftelev1510n, radio, Internet, after—school clubs,
the world come together in teams to work together in museun1/sc1ence eenter events, and engagement W 1th
pursuit of [ 5 Ci e n C e] that will b e n eﬁt all p e 0 pl e” [6]. professmnal organlzatlons that ptomote STEM education.
Likewise, The Brain in Space encourages teachers to ,NSBRI EPOP matenals hlghhght the nature Of the
require students to work in teams. It also introduces nnlverse and enplaln how the hunian body changes when
stu d e nts to the e a rly history of s p a c e exploration, It leaves Earth‘s 0rb1t..These cnrneular materials Include
including the history of Russia’s Sputnik satellites, and Space Connections: Saence Actlyltles fo.r Earth-Based Hu-
the story ofLaika’s journeyinto space. It is available on the mans, a problem—based learning series: comprised Of
Internet at (www.nsbri.org). Bobby's Beat, Whats Up Wlth jose? .Ceailas Story and .The
Bram In Space (www.msm.edu); an 1nqu1ry—based curncu—
lar series, From Outer Space to Inner Space, which
includes four teacher guides called Food and Fitness,
1.1.3. New partnership for 215t Century space education Muscles and Bones, Sleep and Daily Rhythms, and The
New educational strategies have evolved from the Science of the Heart and Circulation (www.bioedonline.org/
decade—old MSM—NASA—NSBRI collaborative, strategies resources/nsbri.cfm) (Fig. 2); and lab—based modules,BonE
that capitalize upon the emergence of electronic technol— Voyage (www.defyinggravitynet) and Human Physiology in
ogies that make it possible to create exciting, innovative Space (www.nsbri.0rg).
teaching—learning—assessment environments; encourage These products have reached thousands of teachers,
new ideas to fuel scientiﬁc literacy; and propel reform in representing millions of students in the US and abroad.
K—16 STEM education. This joint initiative has responded Space Connections: Science Activities for Earth-Based Hu-
to changes in the educational environment (and the mans has been translatedinto Spanish.
availability of new educational tools) by expanding to
add graduate and postdoctoral programs, and a senior 1.1.5. Global teacher professional development
education fellowship dedicated to promoting space ex— Teacher professional development is a cornerstone of
ploration education on an international level. the effort to improve education in the US. To that end, the
The MSM—NSBRI—EPOP is using the Internet to reach National Research Council (NRC) has identiﬁed four
wider audiences across the US and around the world. One educational standards to guide K—12 teacher professional
primary product is an archive that contains materials development activities: (1)teach science throughinquiry;
organized around four mutually reinforcing themes: (2) integrate science knowledge with learning and teach—
teacher and faculty professional development; K—post— ing; (3) encourage continuous reﬂection and improve—
doctoral educational outreach; engagement with educa— ment; and (4) build coordinated programs for professional
tional policy makers; and multimedia outreach to general learning [6]. The MSM—NASA—NSBRI—EPOP team has
audiences. employed these principles to develop a variety of

"
"4","1288 MY. MacLeish, WA. Thomson / Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290
1:; . . ..-.._..'-.;.'.""""""' :
/ . . .... ._.....a..............,w........,. .,,
Biolid ()nline . . ’
,4. ._...._.'__ '.. _ ._ ._.. ._. 2d ()nlmc . .
l. .' ‘ n? ?‘?‘J‘ '""' ‘- ""' """" .
E - ”W E- Tmmmw H «mm . mam .
Ea: EM?"" '3’ ‘ J :
mumBod in cmd m T"" 4 a _-- _ P? x g— _ I
*33T ,fs_-é-ff' _ ‘ 4., *~ ;j' ¥— 4. 1’“ .:
m ~ “v.1 t h 5 ,. .. ﬂ
. g1: 1:7:‘*.’:..‘..'.:ri‘.:"" > ‘ . ‘ ‘ . ii“ _ 2:51.“: A - .
e I! | ' “F” U
E 355.; I .- , .‘._. . '
.1 “>=__;j . . 7‘ '3‘ .l '
Fig. 2. BCM—BioED online. Fig. 3. International education.

programs to enhance teachers’ science knowledge base,
pedagogical skills, and abilities to lead educational change '.
in their schools. These programs have included year—long ""
teacher institutes, summer institutes and workshops for ' .
specialized audiences at professional meetings. The NRC ‘ ' ,- ll
principles also have been employed by the NSBRI EPOP to u"" I I "" ‘ 1'
engage teachers in international space education presen- I 1:“
tations and workshops in Greece, Canada, Austria, Italy, "" 1 ‘
France and Scotland. . j’ ’ ~» \ 1:

One formative international interchange, with the J' . kt: - 'T
Scottish Enterprise program, included visits to schools ‘j , ’ “ , r' - “
across central Scotland. This engagement provided new Q?! ' l . ’ \‘,
perspectives on Scotland’s educational system, including i' I ' ‘ ~ I
the unique outward-bound course at Loch Bi], and the ""- ‘ g ‘
teacher professional development strategies at Strath- ' 1 \l '.
Clyde University. Such international collaborations have ‘i '3)
helped to formulate strategies that are central to the ' 4’ I
activities of the Senior Educator Fellowship ofﬁce at MSM. “
Engagement with national and international colleagues Fig- 4- MSM-Summer ResearCh Program-
has informed MSM—NSBRI EPOP’s establishment of after-
school education programs, such as the MSM-sponsored The NSBRI-Johnson Space Center (JSC) Summer Internship
Mars on the Horizon club; facilitated involvement of Program engages undergraduate and graduate students in
students in international science competitions; and research activities at NASA’s JSC. The MSM Summer
enabled dissemination of an NSBRI-constructed Barany Research Program/Harvard Medical School Summer Min-
Chair, with associated activities and lessons, to 22 ority Medical Student Training Program (Fig. 4) provides
museums/science centers across the US. MSM—NSBRI opportunities for women and students from underrepre-
partnerships with colleagues across the globe have sented minority groups to conduct sleep and circadian
transformed many US teachers’ appreciation for the biology research related to space travel. And the Irish
potential of space life science to inspire and motivate Internship Program enrolls students from Ireland to do
students, and to encourage students to pursue science space life science research.
careers (Fig. 3).

1.1.7. Graduate postdoctoral education

1.1.6. Diversifying undergraduate education A consortium comprised of Texas A&M University, MIT

Recruitment and training of the “brightest and best” and Harvard University conducts a graduate program to
STEM students has become a central focus of US science produce scientists who study and resolve human health
workforce policy [7]. MSM—NSBRI—EPOP activities support problems related to long-duration space ﬂight (e.g., bone
this endeavor by providing summer research internships loss, muscle wasting, and radiation effects). The Medical
for students from the US and abroad. These programs Engineering and Medical Physics (MEMP) program, oper-
serve as a springboard for science students who wish to ated jointly by Harvard and MIT, offers a specialization in
pursue graduate degrees, and also attract women and Bioastronautics, which features research activities in
underrepresented minority students to STEM careers. operational space medicine and biology. The program
Three EPOP summer research internships are ongoing. combines biomedical and engineering disciplines with life

"
"5","MY. MacLeish, WA. Thomson / Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290 1289
sciences, human factors specialization, and hands—on 1.1.9. Public participation
experience in engineering (http://hst.mit.edu/bioastro). The success of future space exploration will depend
The NSBRI Postdoctoral Fellowship Program was upona scientiﬁcally literate public that is informed about
initiated in 2004. Each year, it funds four fellows for a the medical and technological beneﬁts of space explora—
two—year period to pursue their own space—related tion for life on Earth. It also will require the willingness of
biomedical research projects in laboratories across the professionals in this ﬁeld to inﬂuence decision makers
US.Fellows are principalinvestigators for their respective who manage space exploration resources. The MSM—
research projects. They are supported by mentors in NSBRI—EPOP is helping to developamore science—literate
sponsoring US institutions and are introduced to JSC US citizenry through an array of outreach programs and
research facilities and programs. activities, including multimedia productions, such as
television/radio documentaries, a ﬁlm archive, and en—
1.1.8. Senior e ducation fellowship gagements with international space education decision
The primary goals of the Senior Education Fellowship makers interested. in promoting space education. .
(SEF) are to: conduct NSBRI—related educational research Innovative proieets, SUCh as MSM S Blg Czty Immerszon
and publish ﬁndings in academic journals; learn from and program 5?” prov1d1ng test—beds for the developmentof
collaborate with other international scholars to share new multimedianarratives around complex space topics
ideas on space education; study emerging trends in (6%"" forces, grav1ty, hum?“ body ChaF‘ges in space. etc.).
multimedia technology that e nh a n c e g1 ob al ex ch a n g e of These.narrat1ves use soc1al networking technologies to
space exploration education information; and investigate EStathh 10C?! education network systems .and new
teaching and learning strategies that ensure the integra— venuesforudigital Jonrnalism that promote CIVIC engage—
tion of discovery science content into curricula across the ment in conver5?t‘°‘ls about the beneﬁts Of space
global educational spectrum. The SEF ofﬁce collaborates exploration for soc1ety. TO thls end, the .MSM_NSBRI_E_
with NASA and other space agencies to focus on real— PQP1.S collaborating Wlth Atlanta Education Telecommu—
world opportunities in STEM ﬁelds for students, teachers nications, Inc. F0 aecomniodate {ts space edu.cation ﬁlm
and researchers. The SEF ofﬁce also seeks and nurtures archive and deliver1ts radio/telev151on.productions to new
opportunities to develop public—private partnerships that audiences. These efforts have . unhZEd the l\Ieurolab
move space education from the realm of imagination to telev151on documentary, .Explormg. TWO Frontiers: .The
reality. Si n c e its i n c e pti o n, the SEF has p r e s e nt e d p a p e r s Neurolab Space Shuttle, which was distributed to millions
at: the 16th International Astronautic Academy (1AA) O.f Viewers across the US’ to. levﬁrafge snbsequent prodnc—
Humans in Space Symposium in B eiji ng, Chi n a; the tions, including Emory Univer51tys Sgence 111 Your Life;
European Space Agency; International Society for Gravita— National 1’9”“ Radios award—w1nn1ng, Six—part docu—
tional Physiology in A n g e r s, F r a n c e; and the 59th I nt e r— mentary, Blorhedzcal Sczence for Space Travelers; and the
national Astronautical Congress in Glasgow, Scotland. 2007 product1on,Sleep and Space. .
International meetings are framing SEF strategies and , The B zomedzcal Sczence for Space Travelers ser1es 131:0—
fostering innovative approaches for a global, 21 st Century v1des an 1n—depth study Of human. biology and behav1or
space exploration e duc ati o n vision. through the lens of space biomedical research. The ﬁrst
The SEF, an 1AA me mb e r, also p a rti ci p at e d in the IAA segment, Space Aging, examines discoveries related to
award ceremony for the 2007 Luigi Napolitano Book Award, bone 1.055’ eardiovascular disease and muscle atrophy, and
which honored NSBRI scientist and educator, Jay Buckey, their implications for addressmg the aging process on
for his book, The Neurolab Space Mission: Neuroscience Earth. The second part, Getting Your Bearings, discusses
Research in Space. The Luigi award, instituted in 1992, is balance problems faced by astronauts and cosmonauts
given annually by the IAA to recognize excellence for and explains 11,0 W the human neurovestibular system
publications in any space—related ﬁeld (Fig. 5). adapts to shifts in orientation and env1ronment. The third
program, The Human Clock, explains how the human brain
registers changes in light and darkness while in space, and
- describes how these changes help to regulate humans’
internal 24—hour clock on Earth. The Enigma Force
describes the human body’s response to the microgravity
environment of space. Telemedicine covers issues related
to healthcare consultation, diagnosis and delivery when
' the physician is far away, and describes some of NASA’s
developments to facilitate distance medicine for astro—
nauts. Finally, The Long Distance Patient explores the role
of telemetry in treating patients in isolated locations. This
documentary was syndicated to Australia and Canada, and
it aired on 106 stations covering more than 70% of the US
market, including PBS’ top 10 markets. The Biomedical
Science for Space T ravelers series continues to be aired in
some markets.
Sleep and Space features NSBRI scientists, who explain
Fig.5. IAA—SEF Honor. how current sleep research is informing treatment of

"
"6","1290 MY. MacLeish, WA. Thomson / Acta Astronautica 66 (2010) 1285—1290
sleep disorders on Earth and in space. The series is Acknowledgment
composed of the following segments: Sleep and Space;
Why We Sleep; Sleep Dangers; Sleep and Kids; and Sleep and This work is partially supported by the National
Aging. A new podcast SEl‘iES, pl‘OdUCEd by EarthSky, 111C"" Space Biomedical Research Institute through NASA
also has been developed to inform the public about the NCC 9—58.
work of NSBRI scientists.
. References
2. Conclusmn
. [1] National Academy of Sciences (NAS), Rising Above the Gathering
The MSM—NSBRI—EPOP has a long hlStOI‘y Of SUppOl‘t- Storm: Energizing and Employing American for a Brighter Economic
ing NASA’s education mission to strengthen the US science [2] Efgf’sNathQal ﬁademles Prezs’ Waihlrlilggggv 13de 2097- s .
- - - trateglc anagement ounc1, ucatlon trateglc
WOl‘kal‘CE. It has communlcatEd space exPloratlon bIOlOgy Coordination Framework: A Portfolio Approach, Washington, DC,
to schools; supported undergraduate and graduate pro— 2005
grams; funded postdoctoral fellowships; and engaged [3] National Research Council (NRC), Addressing the Nation’s Changing
national and international audiences in exchanges that Needs for B}omedlcal and Behav1oral Selentlsts, Natlonal Academy
. . , , Press, Washlngton, DC, 2000.
promOte glObal V1510n5 for space exlﬂoratlon Educatlon- It [4] National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), Trends in
has instituted an SEF position to focus on scholarly Academic Progress, Washington, DC, 2008. . .
interchanges With space professional audiences around [5] ].S. Buckey, ].L. Homlck (Eds.), The Neurolab Space lab M15510n:
, Neuroscience Research in Space, NASA SP—2003—535, Lyndon B,
the world. The SEF ofﬁce has engaged a varlety of Johnson Space Center,Houston,TX,2002.
international audiences to inform its educational vision [6] National Research Council, Science Education Standards, National
and to build new partnerships to educate the general Academy Press'waShmgton'1391996: , , ,
bl. b h b ﬁ h l . h 1C1 f [7]Transform1ng Undergraduate Educatlon 1n Sc1ence Mathematlcs
pu 1C a OUt t e ene tS t at space EXP oratlon O S 01‘ Engineering and Technology, National Academy Press, Washington,
hfe on Earth. DC, 1999.

"
