"","x"
"1","Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619
.. . . . . '77:"" / 7'""
gl;,fg;;;'r_:f;:;fgx< 542'""if:{:1‘55‘32f‘7‘21i Contents IIStS available at SolenceDIrect ' ’
(5.6339351; ‘1‘"" ' .
01;? Acta Astronautlca /
ELSEVIER journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro {m} I'( j
—
ThN' 15 B' d' 1R hI' ’cl ' cl
e atlona pace lome 1ca esearc nstltute S e ucatlon an
publlc outreach program: Worklng toward a global 21 st century
space exploratlon soc1ety
Marlene Y. MacLeish a'*, William A. Thomson b, Nancy P. Morenob
a Morehouse School of Medicine, 720 Westview Drive, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA
'3 Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
ARTICLEINFO ABSTRACT
Article history: Space Exploration educators worldwide are confronting challenges and embracing
R€C€§V€d 4Aug}15t 2009 opportunities to prepare students for the global 21st century workforce. The National
Receww 1“ rEVISEd form Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI), established in 1997 through a NASA
:DecerrcilbgrDZOOQ b 2009 competition, is a 12—university consortium dedicated to space life science research and
ccép e .ecem er education. NSBRI’s Education and Public Outreach Program (EPOP) is advancing the
Avallable onllne 13 January 2010 _ _ _ , , . . .
— Inst1tute’s m1ss10n by respondlng to global educatlonal challenges through act1v1t1es
Keywords: that: provide teacher professional development; develop curricula that teach students
NSBRI to communicate with their peers across the globe; provide women and minority US
NASA . populations with greater access to, and awareness of science careers; and promote
Educatlonal outreach . . . . .
1nternat10nal sc1ence educatlon partnershlps.
Workforce development _ _ _ _ ,
International education A recent Natlonal Research Counc11 (NRC) Space Studles Board Report, Americas
Future in Space: Aligning the Civil Program with National Needs, acknowledges that “a
capable workforce for the 21st century is a key strategic objective for the US space
program... (and that) US problems requiring best efforts to understand and
resolve...are global in nature and must be addressed through mutual worldwide
action”. [1] This sentiment has gained new momentum through a recent National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) report, which recommends that the life of
the International Space Station be extended beyond the planned 2016 termination. [2]
The two principles of globalization and [SS utility have elevated NSBRI EPOP efforts to
design and disseminate science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
educational materials that prepare students for full participation in a globalized, high
technology society; promote and provide teacher professional development; create
research opportunities for women and underserved populations; and build interna—
tional educational partnerships.

This paper describes select EPOP projects and makes the case for using innovative,
emerging information technologies to transfer space exploration knowledge to
students, engage educators from across the globe in discourse about science curricula,
and foster multimedia collaborations that inform citizens about the beneﬁts of space
exploration for life on Earth. Special references are made to educational activities
conducted at professional meetings in Austria, Canada, France, China, Greece, Italy,
Russia, Scotland and Spain.

© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 404 756 5706; fax: +1 404 752 1043.
E-mail addresses: mmacleish@msm.edu (M.Y. MacLeish), wthomson@bcm.edu (W.A. Thomson), nmoreno@bcm.edu (NP. Moreno).
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2009.12.005

"
"2","MY. MacLeish et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619 1615

1. NSBRI international space ﬂight related education education and workforce challenges through a variety of
activities activities, including those described here.

Recently, NSBRI’s EPOP expanded its mission to include

1.1. US workforce challenges graduate, post—graduate, and international educational

outreach. International outreach is being achieved

Space Exploration educators across the globe are through activities that create opportunities for NSBRI’s
confronting challenges and embracing opportunities to EPOP educators to publish in international journals; meet
educate and prepare students for an increasingly inter— with international counterparts to share ideas on how
connected world. A recent National Research Council best to calibrate educational standards for integration into
(NRC) Space Studies Board report, America’s Future in globaleducational systems; learn about multimedia plat—
Space: Aligning the Civil Program with National Needs, forms that facilitate the introduction of space education
acknowledges that “US problems requiring best efforts to materials into museums, science centers and other
understand and resolve...are global in nature and must be informal education settings; and bUild partnerships for
addressed through mutual worldwide action”. The report knowledge exchange and developing “best practice”
notes that educating “a capable workforce for the 21st strategies to make space exploration education more
century is a key strategic objective for the US space accessible to students, educators and the general public
program” [1]. It further recommends that the Interna— globally.
tional Space Station (155) be utilized fully for education The EPOP SUPPOI‘tS U5 science education reform by
and research [1]. This sentiment has gained new momen— 1151118 space exploration as a foundation from WhiCh t0
tum through a recent National Aeronautics and Space enhance the knowledge base and skills 0f science
Administration (NASA) report, which recommends that teachers; create exciting classroom content; encourage
the life of the 155 be extended beyond its planned students to pursue science, technology, engineering and
termination in 2015 [2]. mathematics (STEM) careers; and establish shared global

These positions echo the US National Academy Of visions for space exploration.EPOP activities also support
Sciences report, Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energiz- NASA'S Education Strategic Coordination Framework,
ing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future, which is “t0 bUild strategic partnerships that promote
which calls for expansion and reinforcement of the US STEM literacy and develop awareness 0f NASA'S 1111551011
talent pool by “developing and retaining the ‘brightest by informing the PUth about the beneﬁts that space
and best’ students, scientists and engineers from the US exploration holds for life on Earth and providing educa—
and the rest Of the world and ensuring that the US is the tional opportunities for scientists, students, and teachers”
premier place in which to innovate” [3]. [6]-

Other eminent US think tanks also express concerns Eight institutional partnerS—Baylor College Of Medi—
about US K—12 science education. Policy makers are cine (BCMX Colorado Consortium for Earth and Space
focused on the education of students from underserved Science Education (CCESSE), Massachusetts Institute Of
populations, a rapidly expanding component of the US Technology (MIT), Morehouse 5Ch001 Of Medicine (MSM),
citizenry. The National Research Council (NRC) has Rice University/The University of Texas Medical Branch
reported data showing that in the US, only 2.7% of Ph.D.s (RU/UTMBX Mount Sinai 5Ch001 Of Medicine (MSSM), and
in the biomedical sciences are held by African Americans Texas A&M University (TAMU)—have contributed to
[4] A150, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and NSBRI’S EPOP CdUCatiOHal initiatives. All EPOP K-lZ mate—
Development’s Programme for International Student rials and activities are framed by four major principles: (1)
Assessment found that US 15—year old students scored increase teachers’understanding of space life sciences and
in the middle or bottom half in global reading, science change educator practices to improve student learning;
literacy, and mathematics tests, compared to peers in (2) develop curricular materials that expand students’
other countries [5]. understanding of the universe and space exploration; (3)

These analyses are focusing US educational reform on increase access for women and underrepresented minor—
“best practices” that promote teacher professional devel— ity 81‘01113 students to graduate degrees in science,
opment; prepare students for full participation in a technology engineering and mathematics (STEM); and
globalized, high technology society; and mobilize US (4) increase public/parental awareness 0f the real—life
educators to communicate and collaborate with their impacts 0f space exploration through diverse media and
international colleagues to develop innovative curricula settings (e.g.,television, radio, Internet, after—school Chle,
and approaches that incorporate global perspectives and museums/science centers, etc.).
provide opportunities for students to communicate with
peers around the world.

1.1.2. A model of international cooperation: neurolab (STS-
90)
1.1.1. Nationalspace biomedical research institute MSM’s The Brain in Space: A Teacher’s Guide with

The National Space Biomedical Research Institute Activities for Neuroscience, was created to increase sec—
(NSBRI), established in 1997 through a NASA competition, 0ndary teacher and student understanding of how the
is a 12—university consortium dedicated to space life human body changes in space. The Guide was produced by
science research and education. The NSBRI Education a multidisciplinary corps of Neurolab scientists and
and Public Outreach Program (EPOP) is responding to educators from six nations. It then was ﬁeld—tested by

"
"3","1616 MY. MacLeish et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619
teachers to ensure the contents were developmentally space—faring vehicles, and the training required by crew
appropriate for students, ﬁtted to educational science members to conduct experiments in microgravity environ—
standards, and engaging. ments. (http://msm.edu)
The Guide introduces students to the unifying scientiﬁc
principles that support life on Earth, as well as micro—
gravity, free fall, the engineering and medical challenges 1.1.3. International space station utilization
of launching humans into space, the search for answers to The 155 is a unique laboratory for educating teachers
questions about changes that occur when the human and students around the world. In November 2008, two
body leaves Earth’s gravity, and the beneﬁts of space orb weaver spiders (representing the Metepeira labyr-
exploration for life and health on Earth. It also informs inthea and Larinioides patagiatus species) and several
students about the international space agencies that painted lady (Vanessa cardui) butterﬂy larvae were
collaborated on the STS—QO mission (European Space transported in special growth chambers on Space Shuttle
Agency, Canadian Space Agency, Centre National d—Etudes Endeavour to the 155. These insects lived in the micro—
Spatiales of France, Deutsches Zentium fur—Und Raum— gravity environment of space for many weeks, and their
fahrt (DLR), National Space Development Agency of Japan, activities were documented through thousands of photo—
and NASA). graphs and video segments transmitted back to Earth.
Throughout, the Guide seeks to communicate a global Students and teachers in Texas and Colorado pilot—tested
vision that stresses the collaborative nature of science and experiments to grow and observe similar organisms in
space research. It emphasizes the unique nature of their classrooms, and compare their Earth—based subjects
international space life science collaboration by revealing with those in space.
how “scientists from around the world come together in The project used the theme of Life in Space to engage
teams to work together in pursuit of (science) that will elementary and middle school students in this innovative,
beneﬁt all people” [7]. open—ended science investigation. It aimed to develop
The Guide encourages teachers to have students work students’ science knowledge, understanding of and parti—
in teams so that they may gain an understanding of the cipation in the scientiﬁc process, awareness of the
cooperative nature of science, the beneﬁts of an inclusive important role that animals play in research, and interest
approach to science research, and the global nature of in pursuing higher education and careers in science. The
exploration. The Guide covers the early history of space project was funded by NSBRI. Partners included the
exploration, including Russia’s Sputnik satellites and University of Colorado’s BioServe Space Technologies,
Laika’s journey into space. Finally, it introduces students Baylor College of Medicine, and the Denver Museum of
to the great potential offered by the International Space Nature and Science.
Station (155) for future research collaborations. The Brain Once on board the 155, the habitats holding the
in Space is available online, at http://www.nsbri.org. organisms were placedinaBioServe—developed Commer—
(Fig. 1). cial Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus, which provided a
Two other teachers’ guides, What’s Up With Jose? and suitable living environment and the components needed
Cecilia’s Story, utilize NASA science resources to educate to support the organisms’ health. The apparatus also
teachers about sleep and the vestibular system, all within the permitted regular examination of subjects’ life cycles and
context of space exploration. Students learn about behaviors in microgravity (e.g., web spinning, emergence
the fundamentals of physics, the ISS, biological clocks, from a Chrysalis, ﬂight, egg laying, etc.), thus providing
the 90—minute light—dark cycle that affects ISS crew foundational data for the project’s experiment/classroom
sleep patterns, technological advances required to build activities.

An accompanying activity guide was developed and
piloted. Teachers were instructed on how to grow the
organisms in their classrooms and received comparison

W33 images from BioServe. Selected photos alsowere made
E [1:] [1 E3111!“ available to teachers and students on BioEd Online
Canada USA France Germany ESA Japan (www.bioedonline.org).. Low—cost, easy—to—assemblespi—
03A NASA CNES DLR NASDA der and butterﬂy hab1tats were de51gned to replicate
those used in space. The ground—based spider habitat uses
4"": ' ' ""7-. 4' __ . ""k "" 3~ x an inexpensive plastic box of the same dimensions as the
,2”: m ""‘m.‘ space habitat, a dog food—based fruit ﬂy culture (to
f"" K . v"", generate fruit ﬂies to feed the spiders), and a plastic
.‘ . "" pillbox to supply water.
i Twenty—ﬁve teachers and 1876 students in Colorado
. '* W and Texas participated in the pilot project. As part of
f ‘ -' their informal feedback, teachers reported that ap—
""\ . J,"" proximately one third of the participating students
“- . _.’ designed additional experiments and more than 75% of
M“ - the students expressed interest in science careers.
Teacher evaluations are being used to reﬁne the
Fig. 1. The Brain in Space: Global Perspectives. educator guide. (Fig. 2).

"
"4","MY. MacLeish et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619 1617
E ' ' . . -‘--- -——~- ~ ,..-.\‘ _ ‘3
1195-122, . ' .‘__."" . .r ‘3. . ’. J,‘ ‘ ,.-. ‘. I ‘ - V W _.’?;‘__ I
4 _ ' 7; : _. ‘3‘? K' ""I"" K ll'wl h.
- ‘ _ '. . /-' ‘ . Jaw.“ 2‘ . ] 4‘ J 1’ . ' 1.1]
‘- .. \, -zo-M ‘ ' r
. . I .‘ .- ; ii , :‘L\-.f:‘-\ _. - - 1 ' _ 9 3'!” 31 I ~ [1,
\. ""4“ . . 1;. . :11? JZ/M‘l- @ I t‘\ ‘ ""'. ~ ' V L
_ .. .I‘. _ - .. . ‘ . f"" Q ' :3 \—
. y"" ‘40 7. :‘i‘x . J ' '1 ~- ;. v:_-1.‘-h’ . ”‘94..
'1 ' .. - ‘1’ . x. . ,- _ _ _~.2‘j ‘ 1 .1 2!. ~. . gﬁ}
.. 1. 1‘ «in. Q2"".
Fig. 2. Spider webs created by orb spiders on 155 (11—20—08). .
Fig. 3. MSM Summer Research Program.
“'4' Space life science in the classroom endeavor b rovidin summer research internshi s for
In 2009, Baylor College of Medicine and the National y p g p
. . . . . students from across the US and abroad. These programs
Space Biomedical Research Institute published a new sc1ence . .
. . . . serve as springboards for sc1ence students to pursue
inquiry module for middle school students, focusmg on the
. . . graduate degrees, and they attract women and under—
effects of m1crograv1ty on the cardiovascular system. The . .
. . . . . represented minority students to STEM careers. Currently,
module, ent1tled The Saence of the Heart and Circulation, 15 the . .
. , there are two EPOP summer research 1nternsh1p pro—
fourth 1n BCM s NSBRI—supported From Outer Space to Inner
. . . . grams: (1) the Johnson Space Center (JSC) Summer
Space series. It prov1des several weeks of instruction related . . . . .
. Internship Program, wh1ch prov1des opportunities for
to the movement of blood through the Circulatory system, . . . . . .
. . . students to jOln ong01ng act1v1t1es at the NASA JSC; and
volume of blood pumped by the heart during spec1ﬁc periods .
. . . . (2) the MSM Summer Research Program/Harvard Medical
of time, major components and functions of the Circulatory . . . . .
. . . . . School Summer Minority Medical Student Training Pro—
system, relationship of phy51cal act1v1ty to heart rate and the . . . .

, . gram, wh1ch prov1des opportunities for women, and
bodys need for oxygen, anatomy and function of the heart, . . . . .

. students from minority groups to part1c1pate 1n space—
meaning and measurement of blood pressure, and effects of relate c1 slee and circadian biolo research (F1 3)
gravity and microgravity on blood ﬂow and blood pressure. p gy ' g. '

The module also includes a pre— and post—assessment to
gauge student knowledge before and after completing the 13- Specialized training
activities. It is available for free download at BCM’s BioEd
Online website. NSBRI consortium members, Texas A&M University,
The Science of the Heart and Circulation was ﬁeld—tested by MIT and Harvard University, are leading a graduate
97 middle school students (grades 6, 7 and 8) in ﬁve different program to develop scientists prepared to solve health
classrooms (the “implementation group”) during 2006—07, problems (e.g., bone loss, muscle wasting, and radiation
following procedures developed by BCM for other NSBRI effects on the human body) that limit long—duration space
educational modules [8]. All students completed a 24— ﬂight. The Harvard—MIT program in Medical Engineering
question, multiple—choice assessment before beginning the and Medical Physics (MEMP) offers a specialization in
unit. They completed the same assessment after ﬁnishing the bioastronautics, which provides students with insight into
unit as part of the science instruction provided by their problems related to human space exploration through
teachers. BCM provided teachers with all materials needed to research activities in operational space medicine and
conduct the activities. A “comparison group” of 48 students biology. The program combines biomedical and engineer—
completed both the pre— and post—assessments, but did not ing disciplines with life sciences, human factors speciali—
participate in the unit’s guided inquiry activities. The zation, and hands—on engineering experience (http://
implementation group’s mean pre—test score was 6.7 (28%) hst.mit.edu/bioastro).
correct answers. The post—test score for this group was 16.9 The NSBRI Postdoctoral Fellowship Program, initiated
(70%) correct answers. This increase in scores was statistically in 2004, funds four fellows each year for a two—year
signiﬁcant, using a paired t—test (p301; N=97). Scores of the period to pursue their own space—related biomedical
comparison group declined from 7.2 (30%) correct answers research projects in laboratories across the US. Fellows
on the pre—assessment to 5.6 (23%) on the post—assessment. are principal investigators for their respective research
This drop in scores may be attributable toalack of interest by projects. They are supported by assigned mentors at
comparison group students in the post—assessment. Teacher sponsoring US institutions and are introduced to NASA
feedback was used to improve and reﬁne the ﬁnal version of JSC’s research facilities and programs to enhance their
the module [9]. research experiences.
1.2. US workforce diversiﬁcation 1.4. Teacher professional development
Recruitment and training of the “brightest and best” Teacher professional development is considered a
STEM students has become a central focus of US science cornerstone of US educational improvement, and the
workforce policy [3]. NSBRI’s EPOP activities support this National Research Council has identiﬁed four educational

"
"5","1618 MY. MacLeish et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619
m /‘ ' .’ . g . ‘-.""_.‘.‘....T..' L” MILL. .7.
BioEd ()nline ‘ ‘ t . ,7 ‘
“—1“ ‘—— '1""- “-4- ""- .‘iLQ’ll'i‘i‘- _‘_'._.'_ _.._‘..._
y]: W . “mi 3;: -;_:~_ _ gfhmmw.
_. ""'""J: ‘3 ‘\\ g, a .4: f. ‘ ‘3. f; -~U __
~ 3’5 l‘ ¢~ m » ‘7 r- "":3. 1
y ""f"" ""a. V 5‘"" — ._ :1: .;..*.‘ .:ri~::‘ ' ' ' ' ' ’
-. e. g + , e 1% a   I ~+
' . ., - 31:31-17"";
‘ WV»? .13 ‘ ‘ , —: ‘
Fig. 4. International Education, Scotland. Fig. 5- BCM’S BiOEd online website.
standards to guide K—12 teacher professional develop— informed about the medical and technological beneﬁts of
ment activities: (1) teach science through inquiry; (2) space exploration for life on Earth. NSBRI’s EPOP is
integrate science knowledge with learning and teaching; contributing to the development of a more scientiﬁcally
(3) encourage continuous reﬂection and improvement; literate US citizenry through an array of outreach
and (4) build coordinated programs for professional programs and activities, including multimedia produc—
learning [1]. NSBRI’s EPOP has employed these principles tions (such as television and radio documentaries and a
to develop and conduct a variety of teacher training ﬁlm archive) and engagement with international educa—
activities, including year—long teacher institutes, summer tion decision makers seeking to promote space life science
institutes, and workshops for specialized audiences at education.
professional meetings. These principles also have been Innovative projects, such as MSM’s Big City Immersion,
used to engage teachers in international space education are providing test—beds for the development of new
presentations and workshops in Greece, Canada, Austria, multimedia narratives focusing on complicated space
Italy, France and Scotland. topics, such as forces, gravity, and changes that occur to
NSBRI’s EPOP has established an ongoing after—school the human body while in space. These narratives are using
education program, Mars on the Horizon, which sponsors social networking technologies to develop local education
international student competitions and introduces US network systems and create new venues for digital
students and teachers from underserved areas to the journalism that promote civic engagement in conversa—
potential and excitement of discovery science. (Fig. 4). tions about the beneﬁts of space exploration for society.
To this end, MSM is collaborating with Atlanta
1.4.1. Utilizing cyberspace Education Telecommunications Inc. to update its space
NSBRI’s EPOP is using cyberspace to disseminate education. ﬁlm archive to reach new audiences: This
educational content to large and diverse audiences across Parmel‘s’hlp has disseminated .the Neurolab .missmn
the US and around the world. Information technology is telev151on documentary, Exploring TWP frontierss the
proving to be a cost—effective way to reach a global Neurblab space Shnttle; the 'award—w1nn1ng, .National
audience, collect usable data on how materials are being Public Radio (NPR) 51x—part radio documentary, Biomedical
use cl (and by whom), an cl create an cl provide in n 0v ativ e, Sczence for Space Travelersaand the 2007 product10n,Sleep
interactive opportunities for students at all levels. But of and Space: to millions of Viewers across the US“ .
course, the Internet cannot replace the more personalized, The BlOTl’ledlCCll Sczence for Space Travelers seues
hands—on, face—to—face interactions that are so essential prov1des an m'dePth 109k at human biology and behav1or
for teacher professionaldevelopment,classroominterface through space blomemcal research. The ﬁrst program,
with students, and collegial interchanges. NSBRI’s EPOP Space Aging, exam 1nes discoveries related to bone 105.5’
balances both approaches to engage K—12 teachers, 'cardiovascular disease 6?“ muscle atrophy, and their
students, and families online, at professional meetings, implications for addre551ng the aging 'process on Earth.
in classrooms, at museums and science centers, and at The second program, Getting Your Bear1ngs,discusses the
international meetings. EPOP products and activities have balance ptoblems faced by astronauts ancl cosmonauts,
reached—and continue to reach—thousands of teachers, and explains 11,0 W the 1‘91““ neurbvestibular system
representing millions of students across the US a n cl adapts to shifts1nor1entat10nandenv1ronment.Theth1rd
. program, The Human Clock, explains how the human
abroad. (Fig. 5). . . . . .
brain registers changes 1n11ght and dark in space, and how
these functions help regulate the human internal 24—hour
1.5. Public US public participation clock on Earth. The Enigma Force describes how the
human body responds to the microgravity of space.
The future success of space exploration will require Telemedicine discusses the need to consult, diagnose,
international cooperation and a general public that is and deliver effective medical care when the physician is

"
"6","MY. MacLeish et al. /Acta Astronautica 68 (2011) 1614—1619 1619
common understanding of future global space exploration
workforce needs. (Fig. 6).
"" . 1
~ ‘1 ‘ \; s
t 5: 2. Conclusion
[ i .
\ :L ' \ h ‘ a . ' 2;: V, - Space Exploration educators globally are confronting
. e i“ -1 T? 9:2“ - --
a , . ., . . \1 gig? — 9 challenges and embracmg opportunities to educate
1;! , ‘ - ‘ students for an increasingly interconnected world.
- ‘ NSBRI’s Education and Public Outreach Program has
‘ expanded its missmn to 1nclude international coalitions
1‘ 11' and redesign educational outreach materials and activ—
. '69s] . ""; ities that prepare students for full participation in an
{ .- 0 ' ~ ;_ "" interconnected, international, high technology society.
I - The EPOP has instituted a fellowship position dedicated
' to international astronautical education, and is using
Fig. 6. International Space Medicine Summit 111, Rice University. innovative 215t century information technologies to
transfer space exploration knowledge to students, engage
f c1 d 'b f NASA’ d l t t educators worldwide in discourse about science curricula,
faraway, 31 escri 63.591116: t S eveléapnhen Th0 utilize the ISS, broaden access to science careers, and
Lac11 get 15 anPcet.met 1c1nle or $15 miiau ?t ina yt, .e foster multimedia collaborations that inform the general
ong. ls ance a ien , EXP ores e. ro e 0 e eme ry. in public about the beneﬁts that space exploration holds for
treating patients in isolated locations. The Biomedical life on Earth
Science for Space T ravelers documentary was syndicated to
Australia and Canada, and aired on 106 stations reaching
more than 70% of the US. All major markets, including
New York, Massachusetts, California, Detroit, Texas, Acknowledgement
Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Washington DC, and Pennsyl—
vania, were covered. The series continues to be aired This work is partially supported by the National Space
SEIECUVEIY in some markets. Biomedical Research Institute through NASA NCC 9—58.
Sleep and Space features NSBRI—NASA scientists, who
explain how current sleep research is informing treatment References
of sleep disorders both on Earth and in space. The series is
COITlpl‘lSEd Of the follow1ng SEgmentS: Sleep and Space, [1] National Research Council, America’s Future in Space: Aligning the
Why We Sleep, Sleep Dangers, Sleep and Kids, and Sleep Civil Program with National Needs, National Academies Press,
and Aging (www.wabe.org). And a new podcast series, [2] Lvaéhmﬁtg‘nvmv 2909- d 5 Ad . . . A . R
- - - - atlona eronautlcs an pace l‘l‘lll‘llstl'atIOI‘l ugustlne eport,
focused on NSBRI sc1ence and .discovery, 15 being devel— JSC—Houston, TX, My 2009
OPEC] by EarthSky communlcatlonS, 111C [3] National Academy of Sciences, Rising Above the Gathering Storm:
Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future,
- - - - - National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2007.
1'6' Building mternatlonal partnerships [4] National Research Council, Addressing the Nation’s Changing Needs
for Biomedical and Behavioral Scientists, National Academies Press,
NSBRI’s EPOP has participated in the International [5] ‘éVaShIPgtfm [)va 21300- . C . d D 1 P
- - - rganlzatlon 01' COI‘lOl‘l‘llC ooperatlon an EVE Opl‘l‘lEI‘lt’S 1'0-
Space MEdlcme Summlts’ and has C(?nvenec] at the. James gramme for International Student Assessment: Trends in Academic
A. Baker, 111, Institute for Public Policy at Rice Univer51ty Progress, Washington, Dc, 2003
(an NSBRI consortium member). The stated purpose Of [6] NASA.Strategic Management Couneil: NASA Education Strategic
these summits is to “foster increased communication, ggggdlnatlon Framework. A Portfollo Approach. Washlngton, DC,
COOperation, and CCllaboration among the worlds tOp [7] ].S. Buckey, ].L. Homick, Ed., The Neurolab Space Lab Mission:
physicians and scientists in space medicine and the space Neuroscience Research in Space. NASA SP-2003-535. Lyndon B-
life sciences” Johnson Space Center, Houston TX, 2002.
, ' , , [8] B. Tharp, D. Erdmann, M. Matyas, R. McNeel, N. Moreno. The Science
Thls forum has EXPandEd the SCOPE Of EPOP 5 Interna' of the Heart and Circulation. National Space Biomedical Research
tional outreach by allowing educators from across the Institute. BioEd: Houston,TX, 2009.
globe to jointly design strategies to increase student and [9] N- Moreno' J: Denkzj- Roberts! 3- Tharp, M- 30“, W- Thomson, A“
. l . I approach to 1mprov1ng sc1ence knowledge about energy balance and
.Educatm: access to educatlona . materla sv promOte. an nutrition among elementary and middle school students, CBE Life
international perspective in curricular de51gn, and gain a Sciences Education 3 (2004) 122—130.

"
