"","x"
"1","fm'h Available online at www.sciencedirect.com —""————_

/f ._ ' _. '7 -,: '

53% 5- D- t 1181111
W C'ence ""3C mmmmmntram
PERGAMON Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212 E

www.elseVier.c0n1/locate/actaastr0
The Columbus-CC—Operating the European laboratory at ISS
T. Kueh*, D. Sabath
German Space Operations Center, DLR Oberpfaﬁ‘enhofen, Germany
Available online 21 February 2008
Abstract
The European ISS Columbus Control Center (Col-CC) joined the Club of ISS mission control centers in Moscow, Houston
and Huntsville. It took some time to reach that goal. In 1998 the European Space Agency (ESA) awarded the German Aerospace
Center DLR to design, develop and implement the Col-CC at its premises in Oberpfaffenhofen, near Munich, Germany. In
2002 a core mission operations team was built up. An integrated team of BSA, industry and control center started to deﬁne
processes and implemented ﬁrst operations products and tools. This was accompanied by regular meetings with the international
partners in the US and Russia. With intensive training and numerous simulations the team was able to gain experience and is
now eagerly waiting for the launch of Columbus. However, thanks to the involvement in some operational activities the Col-CC
staff has already been able to gain operational ISS experience. After the inauguration in October 2004 Col-CC supported the
Eneide mission in April 2005 when the Italian ESA-Astronaut Roberto Vittori ﬂew onboard a Soyuz t0 the ISS where he spent
10 days. Another very important milestone was the operations support for ESA’s Astrolab mission. The Astrolab mission was
of major importance for Europe and particularly for Germany because it implied the ﬁrst long duration ﬂight of BSA astronaut
Thomas Reiter, an astronaut of German nationality. The tasks of Col-CC are described and also the experiences made with the
ﬁrst operational long-term mission which took place from July to December 2006. Meanwhile the Col-CC was able to reach the
operational readiness status for the Columbus mission which is set for a launch date later in 2007. Despite the concentration
on the challenging Columbus Assembly and Checkout phase emphasis is already laid on the following increments for the
European ISS operations. Early 2006 ESA transferred the operational tasks and responsibilities to the hands of the industrial
operator. This approach creates beneﬁcial synergies between the Columbus manufacturer and the experts at the control center.
The cooperation will be further intensiﬁed with BSA, as the leading agency, the scientiﬁc users and the payload providers. The
integrated operations team consists of technical and management experts from all involved parties, with key functions distributed
among the partners according to the expertise available.
© 2008 ElseVier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction of scientiﬁc, commercial and manned spaceﬂight mis—
sions. This has resulted in valuable experience in many
1.]. German Space operations center different missions. GSOC employs approx. 170 DLR
staff and provides contractual work for another 150
Since 1969 the German Space Operations Center specialists from subcontractors (Fig. l).
(GSOC) prepares and conducts the mission operations
1.2. Columbus control center
* C . A large portion of the work effort at GSOC is ded—
orresponding author. . .
E-mail addresses: Th0mas.KuCh@DLR.de (T. Kuch), mated to the operation Of the European COlumbus
Dieter.Sabath@DLR.de (D. Sabath). module as a part of the ISS.
0094—5765/$ — see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.actaastr0.2007.12.041

"
"2","T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212 205
2. Preparation of the European [88 operations
\ .,. n a ,. Already early in the preparation there is a need for
f T ' i f . “J. _ u _ _‘ . the deﬁnition, development, implementation, testing
1,. -~ ,- ’ﬁ 41%” . f '11:! and approval of the operation concept, for processes,
_, , ' t' ._ (§- ophcfzﬂ‘ procedures and tools. These activities can be done in
. _, - é}? ‘ . k “w; ~81 m parallel to the development of the ﬂight hardware. A
1‘ - _‘.“‘,..u""1 “- z‘ﬁf' Close and interactive cooperation of the development
‘ * ﬂy "" d"" .' _ v . 'af'” 4“"" and the operations teams is for the beneﬁt of both. This
-‘ ""1‘1 "" - ' ""J; approach was followed in the operations preparation.
. $13?) , « . Additionally, the operations team took advantage of the
,v “ "" 3""; k -' -: ‘ already gained operations experience With 188 from
' ._ __'- _-. -7 _ 7 ”m, our American and Russian partners.
“a Q23. '— The operations of the Columbus module Will be per—
formed from the Col—CC. There are three main tasks:
Fig. 1. GSOC.
o monitoring and control of the Columbus system
Which is attached to the 188;
r ”gt 0 coordination of the European experiment and payload
""M -; operations onboard the 188;
ﬁ 0 operation of the communication infrastructure and
:ﬂ 9 - communication links from and to all partners.
. Eu .2: . n 3:: F n 8 There are two ﬂight control rooms available, one plan—
"".el '4' 4 a 3- ;_ 2.. I . a ., ‘_ ning room, four user control rooms and additionally one
3.: 'L j-B‘L backup ﬂight control room in a separate building which
r - ’ ‘. "" ﬂ- 1 a __ can be used in case of a system breakdown. One of the
, ' ---‘ f “ ' - ﬂight control rooms is used for operations preparation,
3.5,"" the other one is used for the real—time operations. The
control rooms are equipped With 14 consoles Which a1—
_ low direct access to the status telemetry parameter of
Flg' 2' COIumbus‘CC comm room the Columbus module as well as to data and Video chan—
nels of the 188 (Fig. 3).
The ﬂight control team consists of several engineers
After the docking of the European Columbus module With different and speciﬁc tasks. The coordination of
BSA Will become responsible for the Columbus open these so—ealled positions is done by the ﬂight director
ations. Under a contract of the industrial operator the (FD) who is the responsible person for the operations
Columbus Control Center (Col—CC) monitors and eon— in the ﬂight control room. The FD collects the infor—
trols the Columbus module, conﬁgures and operates the mation of the relevant ﬂight control team members and
ground communications network and coordinates the decides about the next steps. The FD is in direct contact
payload operations (Fig. 2). With the FD in the other control centers in Houston and
The Col—CC in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany is work— Moscow, With the ground operations team at Col—CC
ing together With User Support and Operations Centers and the ESA Operations Management. In some cases
(USOC) in nine European countries, the Engineer— the FD consults the Medical Operations Experts. The
ing Support Centers (ESC) in Bremen, Germany and most relevant positions are listed in Table 1. One een—
Torino, Italy. Important partners are the NASA eon— tral task of the ﬂight control team is the commanding
trol centers at the J ohnson Spaceﬂight Center (J SC) of the Columbus module Which disburdens some of the
in Houston, Texas and at the Marshall Spaceﬂight load from the astronauts. Through the remote control
Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama as well as the from ground the ISS onboard crew can concentrate on
Russian Flight Control Center (ZUP) in Moscow and the activities that cannot be done from ground.
the Japanese Space Station Integration and Promotion The ﬂight control team needs the strong support
Center (SSIPC) in Tsukuba. by the ground operations team Which conﬁgures and

"
"3","206 T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212
M
$ ' ""
a - “
Q g.“ g . DAMEC
A GMT I
. O ERASMUS
xi“ _ . mm
- —
A
‘x
, x
\
9mm
\ MARS ‘
, “‘1
Fig. 3. Ground sub—network during the Astrolab mission (July—December 2006).

Table 1

Flight control positions

Position Role

Columbus ﬂight director (FD) The Col—CC ﬂight director (COL FD) is responsible for overseeing the conduct of
safe and effective Columbus element system and payload operations

Operations coordinator (OC) The Col—CC operations coordinator is responsible to the COL FD for coordinating
the payload operations in the Columbus element

Col—system engineer The Columbus systems engineer position is responsible for monitoring the perfor—
mance of the Columbus Electrical Power Subsystem, Thermal Control Subsystem,
Environmental Control and Life Support Subsystem (ECLSS)

Data Management System (DMS) engineer The Data Management System engineer (DMS engineer) is responsible for the on—
line monitoring and control of the Columbus DMS hardware and software

Communications ofﬁcer (Comms) The communications ofﬁcer is responsible for the on—line monitoring and control
of the Columbus VDPU, HRM, and communications equipment, and will provide
Columbus end—to—end communications oversight

Columbus operations planner (COP) The COP is responsible for coordinating the daily planning for Columbus system
and payload activities

Crew interface coordinator (EUROCOM) The EUROCOM is responsible for the COL FD for supporting crew operations with
respect to both systems and payload operations

"
"4","T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008 ) 204—212 207
.3001 - ECLSS Overview? - , _ g g
J ""7 2 T 372277 413.2 xxxx 005w 30m CLOSED
0h OH OK XXXX LUSH) XXXX CLOSED
9201.11 0. 0 ' . . XXXX (JJBEU XXXX (LUSH)
23.1 22.0 3113.2 XXXX LOSED XXXX CLOSED
I3, .311 0.00 (H ‘ f V ' . 3 l
‘0. If, PR. 1!
1. j i ‘ . XXXX (7.05“) XXXX (lOSFD
A‘.‘AIL A‘AIL 82.23 XXXX LOSED XXXX CLOSED
0‘4 00 XXXX LOSED
9963.3 8283.3 XXXX C_OS[D ‘u
30.0 30.0 82.'3
1.00 . 0.40 0 XXXX LOSED OPEN XXXXXX
~ ~ . .- . XXXX LOSED OPEN XXXXXX
"" 'l H ‘ XXXX COSED OPFN XXXXXX
22.0 275.0 XXXX (.OSFD OPFN XXXXXX
ow 0F: ., .. . , .. . ‘
(1K l-RQOR --
ENABLED DISABLED 00 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0
ENABLED DISABLED OK 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0
82.0 0.0 50.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0
22.0 22.0 -23. -23.
‘ ‘ NORVAL ‘ ‘ \‘ORVAL 00 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0
UleBLtD DLSABLED OK 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0 83.0
, , ‘ ., g ‘ 30.0 83.0 83.0 83.01 83.0 83.0 83.0
. ‘ “ , ‘ ‘ ‘1 t 4 ‘ OK
ON OCF 1.3 1.3
5000. , 2 (V), 0 . .
30.0 22.0 152.3133?)
0.85 0.01 30.1 350.1 l 08'
0. 18 0. 00 ,, 7 7 7 . . ,
. __ 80.1 750.1
0.90 0.91] ;_
408 409 38.1 38.1
Fig. 4. Alphanumerical display of selected Columbus status parameters.
monitors the communication links and the Col—CC information Will be transferred into the 133 wide Cau—
subsystem. This support is given from a separated tion and Warning System.
control room from Which the ground controllers han— The processes for the operations in the control cen—
dle the contact to the European user centers and the ter, for the communication between the individual ﬂight
international partners. control team members and the international partners are
well deﬁned and documented. In order to verify and
2-1- T0015 development validate the processes, procedures and software tools,
all these Will be employed in simple and complex tests.
The tOOIS for the ﬂlght control team 1hChlde pro— The operations team Will use them to a maximum eX—
cedures, processes, documents, telemetry displays and tent in stand—alone, in system validation tests and in in—
operations support software that have either been de— tegrated simulations ﬁnally With all those who will be
veloped by the team itself or in very Close cooperation involved in the real operations.
according to their speciﬁcations.
The main tOOI iS the Monitoring and COHthl SUbsys— 2.2 Training, simulations and cernficalion
tern, a software system Which processes the received
data and provides alphanumerical or graphical displays Not only tools and documents need test and veriﬁca—
of the Columbus module. The ﬂight control team de— tion, also the operations staff is subject to an intensive
ﬁnes the display layout according to their needs and can training, qualiﬁcation and certiﬁcation process. At Col—
improve the contents and representation based on the CC the basic training comprises the familiarization at
experiences made during tests and simulations. Fig. 4 the control room console With tools, e.g. the Monitoring
shows an example of an alphanumerical telemetry dis— and Control system and the voice communication sys—
play With simulated data of the Columbus module. tern. The new team member attends courses covering
The parameters that have to be permanently moni— the relevant operations processes at Col—CC, the Colum—
tored include temperature, pressure, air humidity and bus module, the European ISS payload and the 133 in
composition as well as the status of the power supply, general. After this the ﬂight controller participates in
the cooling system and the data communication links. ﬁrst internal simulations at Col—CC. The ﬂight con—
Special alarm limits are deﬁned for a better recogni— troller can send commands to a special simulator Which
tion of potential anomalies, resulting in color ﬂagging provides the relevant Columbus data. Another objective
of the related parameters. In severe failure cases the of the simulations is to improve the cooperation of all

"
"5","208 T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212
operations team members under as realistic conditions encompasses all activities for the relevant increment and
as possible. The team Will be confronted With many describes apossible sequence of events for the6months.
anomaly situations and the resulting reactions and It is ensured that the available crew time is sufﬁcient
anomaly resolutions Will be carefully observed. It takes and all necessary resources are provided to fulﬁll the
9—15 months before a ﬂight controller can be consid— objectives and requirements (Fig. 5).
ered as a certiﬁed team member. The last step before The next step (b) is the Weekly Look—Ahead Plan
the certiﬁcation is the active participation in simula— (WLP), always established 10 days in advance. The
tions With the NASA control centers in Houston and WLP details the activities for each day of the week,
Huntsville, the so—called J oint Multi—Segment Training showing all required tools and procedures. Based on the
(J MST). There are special simulations together With WLP the operations teams and the crew can already co—
the Moscow control center for payload operations in ordinate their preparations. The last planning step (C) is
the Russian segment. the generation of the On—Orbit Short—Term Plan (OSTP).
The OSTP is issued 1 week in advance and gives a
2.3. Planning detailed description of the sequences of the crew and
ground activities. It contains all Changes With regard to
The disposable time of astronauts onboard the 188 is the WLP. The OSTP is discussed the evening before
very limited. Thus the time for experiment operations and is to be followed to a maximum extent. The plan
is very valuable. It has to be ensured that all activities can be modiﬁed and adapted to the required Changes
onboard the Columbus module are carefully planned caused by anomalies Within the experiment execution
in advance. The planning for the 188 is conducted or other unforeseen events. The planning team tries to
in increments of approx. 6 months. In the ﬁrst phase shift delayed activities to one of the next free slots in
(a) an On—Orbit Summary (008) is generated which the schedule.
3. Columbus operations
a Increment 14
PAC activities 3.]. Columbus system
Ham Radio - appr. 0.5 hr
55A PAO' aWr. 1 hr A substantial part of the working time is related to
Discovery Channel '0-5 hrs maintaining acceptable living and working conditions
for the astronauts onboard the 188. Therefore, the prin—
cipal task of Col—CC is the activation and later the long—
term monitoring and control of the Columbus module.
b 2mm ISS-CD F51 The Columbus module does not have its own power
_ supply or oxygen generation system. However, the ﬂight
~——-~——~—— control team has to ensure the nominal conditions of
f‘ff’ ;‘ I the Environmental Control and Life Support System
(ECLSS). Cabin air supply, air return lines, air ventila—
tion and smoke detectors have to be monitored and the
oxygen, C02— and water vapor concentration have to be
C .. kept in an acceptable range.
SSJ—JIMN ""2‘7 3:: 33‘. :3. 2"": 3:: it} 3:... , . [:1 Another task of the Systems position is the moni—
- toring of the power supply Which has to comply With
""m- the operational needs for the Columbus subsystems
)Rv_: , ESWOENMM':WM and experiments Without Violating the maximum power
=°""I¥¥_1’ii 77:91.1 t .14, consumption.
F°1-IEEEH—l 5 4“ 1 A large portion of the energy is transformed into
M'\“ j'_\_ i w; L ' - s :1 heat and therefore experiments and subsystems must be
fl‘ggxgrﬁ ‘1‘ ’ cooled by water Circulation. The ﬂight controller has to
j ’mr: ‘ ”’H ensure that one of two water pumps is always running
‘ Li?7"";j'f.‘f.'jf_:);2‘; and that there is no leak in the pipes. The heat dissipa—
tion through cold plates has to be carefully supervised
Fig. 5. Planning steps. as well as the correct conﬁguration of data, Video and

"
"6","T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212 209
voice communication links. In a failure case the redun— 4.1. Payload coordination at Col-C C
dant system has to be activated otherwise most of the eX—
periments and some subsystems have to be switched off. At the COI'CC the operations coordinator (DC)
All anomalies or failures have to be analyzed not only position is the person responsible for the experiment
by the ﬂight control team but also by the Engineering operation and keeping the contact With the Payload OP""
Support Team (EST). The EST is composed of the eX— erations and Integration Center (POIC) in Huntsville.
perts of the manufacturers of the different Columbus 1f experiments have to be conducted in the Russian
subsystems. Most Of the EST members are located in segment the contact to the Russian ﬂight control team
the ESC in Bremen and Torino, while only a few of in MOSCOW must be established by the USOCS-
them support the ﬂight control team on site at Col—CC.
The EST analyzes the anomaly and tries to reproduce 42- Coordination at the U SOCS
the anomaly on simulators and issues a recommenda— , ,
tion how to solve the problem. It is the task of the ﬂight The nine USOCS are the contact p Olnts for the Eu—
control team to execute the recommended procedures in ropean SCIenttStS who p erform the experiments on the
order to restore the proper condition of the Columbus 188' The USOCS sup p Ott the p rep aration and proV1de
module. worklng places for the monitoring and control of their
experiments. The commands issued at the USOCs are
3.2. Data- and communication system transmitted Via the IGS to the Col—CC and further on
Via the Mission Control Centers to the 188. The same
The Columbus subsystem data and the payload data way back is used to receive the telemetry data from the
are collected by the Data Management System (DMS), experiments at the 188'
combined in ackets and transferred Via the Trackin . . .
and Data Relat; Satellite System (TDRSS) to the NASE 43' Coordmatzon Wlth ESA
ground station th White Sands. Through the Mission ESA is responsible for the European contribution to
Control Center In Houston and ESA’S Interconnecting the 188 as one of the International Partners. ESA selects
Ground Segment. {IGS} the datareach the COI'CC' . the European experiments that Will be ﬂown to the 188
The DMS pos1tion 1s respons1ble for the monitoring and places contracts for the ISS exploitation With the
and control of the DMS and ﬁnally the correct data USOCs and the industrial operator Astrium.
telemetry display at the Col—CC ﬂight control room. In preparation for a new 188 mission or for a new
The data transfer from the Colurnbus thethhe V13 the increment ESA deﬁnes the scope and selects the eX—
NASA and BSA communication hhke he m the hand periments that are to be performed. ESA has some
Of the eommunications ofﬁcer. Because Of bandwidth representatives of its mission management located at
restrictions not all Columbus data can be transmitted Col—CC. They might be involved in the decision process
and the releyant data packets have to be selected by the in case of critical or unforeseen events.
communications ofﬁcer for transm1ss1on. Some other operations functions are taken over by
ESA such as the MedOps position Which monitors to—
4' Coordination 0f the ISS payload operations gether With the counterpart in Houston or Moscow the
. . health of the astronauts and prepare the training pro—
Bes1de the Columbus systeni operations the coor— gram for the astronauts. ESA also provides the so—called
dination of the payload act1V1t1es is another task of EUROCOMs who are the only ones who directly com—
the COI'CC' In contrast to NASA and to Russia the municate With the ESA astronaut onboard the 188.
European ISS infrastructure is decentralized around the
Col—CC connecting nine User Support and Operations 5. ISS communication infrastructure
Centers (USOC) in different countries. In this context
the role of Col—CC is the coordination of the experi— 5. 1. Operations of the European communication
ment operations together With the user centers and the infrastructure
international partners. The exploitation of the 188 is a
common task of all international partners. Therefore, a The European communication network IGS con—
Close cooperation is required to ensure the provision of nects Col—CC With the control centers in Houston,
the necessary resources (power, water, data, Video and Huntsville and Moscow. The main communication
voice). The payload operations can only be started after links (data, voice and Video) to the ISS and to the
the formal approval of all involved control centers. Columbus module are routed Via the Mission Control

"
"7","210 T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212
Fwd:3Mbps ((XIA)
Ransom vt""
0.. ‘— mm 1—. ti
6"". ' Z 8-3:“ —. r "" '
m ""\ (mmow-nate)
s-m Fwd: 72/6 kbps :8
\ /
Fromm};
0,. w—zﬂ... ! link
0’ 0 \
mt.
""\ Columbus-CC
\ mm mm l'ot:
K odnmooodimﬁm ommuudan)
‘ om-linomgimng‘ W ommwmﬁu
V! ldﬂnirllquimlyqlim
A t
mu
L7 '05 -DItISeMnu E
A -Volce Service.
mm COMM -mmm WIRQS
- mlc -—-———_
$3 *1
Tl'lllilllh PDSS ,
1108C
NASANIW ..
Mae
my“ ComrdCuter Mammal W E Am
ATV-CC ' .s
Fig. 6. Communication network.
Center in Houston. However, the experiment data are momentum was regained in course of the preparation
provided Via the NASA control center in Huntsville. for Europe’s active participation in 188 operations.
A high reliability of the communication network is The handover of the operational responsibility from
to be ensured by Col—CC’s ground operations team ESA t0 the industrial operator took place on January 1st,
that is operating the network on a 24 h/7 days a week 2006. The ﬁrst practical Challenge was to be the long
basis. The ground controllers also connect the ATV duration mission Astrolab. The ﬂight of the German
control center in Toulouse and conﬁgure and monitor ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter from July to December
the communication links. In case of network anoma— gave the Col—CC the Chance to gain valuable experi—
lies the ground controllers initiate corrective actions ences in applying processes, procedures and optimizing
to restore the correct conﬁgurations. The ground con— technical and human interfaces between the partners in
trollers are supported by the Col—CC system controllers the mission control in Moscow, Houston and Huntsville
Whose main task is the conﬁguration and monitoring of as well as the involved European user centers. A11 C01—
the Col—CC internal subsystems (Fig. 6). CC subsystems (voice, Video, data systems, except the
Columbus Monitoring and Control Subsystem) could
6, Current status he used in the operational real—time environment. They
showed stable conditions and in case of anomalies C01—
After the successful ﬁrst return—to—ﬂight mission CC staff could work around or ﬁX the problems Without
0f the Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005 a lot of endangering the success of the planned activities.

"
"8","T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212 211

Despite the fact that most of the ﬂight control con—
centrated on preparing (with many simulation sessions) //”/
for the Columbus system operations a core team could
already participate in the daily routine operations for
Astrolab, mainly taking the role of an operations c00r— ‘iii’il I L
dinator. The ground operations team was increased to ' ; \Il . "" ~
cover the extended operations hours going up to a 24/7 ' + ' . ’\,élelﬁs/\\n
support. + 4-_a-.:;2222'“-'/.--'

In the area of training and simulations, a number of +’ .. . I . ;.
sessions had to be intensiﬁed because of the larger ﬂight
operations team. Training instructors, ﬂight and ground A S T R O L A B
control team members participated in training courses v
at MCC—H, POIC, EAC and on site at Col—CC. The V
stand alone simulations addressing selected operations ' ‘ :
scenarios for Columbus steady—state phase and the 1E—
ﬂight was conducted for the new team members. Mean—
while the integrated simulations were in progress and Fig. 7. Logo of the Astrolab mission.
already some of the JMSTs with NASA took place.

For the up “mug ﬂlght 188 IE Wthh has as the o planning of European actiVities was performed but
main task the docking Of the Columbus module, the restriction of operations to ﬁxed days per week was
team members have been selected and grouped. The sce— not possible.
narios for Assembly and Checkout of Columbus were
intensively trained and simulated in many dedicated Positive experiences:
sessions. The certiﬁcation process for the involved staff
was completed in October 2007. In parallel many new 0 Good working relation with all teams involved, after
team members joined them in order to cover the re— some initial conﬂicts could be solved and roles clar—
quested 24/7 operations support for the commissioning iﬁed.
and the future steady—state increment phase. 0 BSA crew actiVities were easy to follow by using the

The formal approvals to proceed have been given NASA tool, the Onboard Short—Term Plan Viewer
in two major reViews, the ﬂight operations readiness (OSTPV)-
reView (FORR) at Col—CC (December 2006) and the 0 Great support from the teams in Moscow, Houston
ﬂight operations reView (FOR) at JSC Houston (July and Huntsville.

2007). o GSOC ground controller 0n—c0nsole times were
increased when needed.

7. Experiences made during Astrolab mission 0 Operation coordination already started with be—
ginning 0f Increment 13, so all centers and teams

During the Astrolab mission (Fig. 7) the following involved were familiar with operational processes.
experiences could be gained in the: 0 Some problems With V01ce System (VOCS) could be

solved.
0 monitoring of the ISS routine operations which is Potential areas ofimprovement include:

necessary for console manning concepts and shift

planning; 0 The often short—term announcement for public rela—
o supporting an astronaut for both payload and crew ti0n (PR) events could be improved by better plan—

operations; ning.

o interfacing with international partner (IP) sites which 0 Streamline the written interactions with the European
is important for future OIP discussions; astronaut (e—mails, USOS daily summary).
0 long—term use of European Ground Segment which 0 Timely inputs to radiograms and PR scripts.
allowed to ﬁnd advantages, constraints and problems; 0 The time of the ﬂight control team members for the
o coordination within the European decentralized Op- preparation of upcoming increments (e.g. for training
erati0ns setup respecting all the constraints; or updates of operations products) has to be foreseen
0 interaction with the ESA management which should in parallel to 0n—g0ing real—time operations.
be focused on one Ops. Manager; 0 Upgrades to Ground Segment and operational tools.

"
"9","212 T. Kuch, D. Sabath / Acta Astronautica 63 (2008) 204—212
8. Conclusion and outlook mission currently planned for December 2007. Both
ground systems and operations teams have been
The Columbus Control Center (Col—CC) has suc— Checked, trained and validated for both the Columbus
cessfully passed the ﬂight operations reviews and has Assembly and Checkout mission as well as for future
already been involved in 188 operations from July to increment operations.
December 2006 during the Astrolab missionThe ﬂight of The main objective for Col—CC is to perform a sue—
the German ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter signiﬁcantly cessful 1E mission and together with BSA and the
increased the public interest in Germany to human space industrial operator to ensure reliable and safe oper—
ﬂight. On the other side many experiences could be ations for future increments. In order to fulﬁll the
gained by Col—CC within these 6 months of operations. service requirements Within the provided resources an
The Col—CC center in Oberpfaffenhofen near efﬁcient and pragmatic concept has to be found and
Munich, Germany is ready to support the 188 IE applied.

"
