"","x"
"1","Earth, Moon, and Planets (2005) 94: 185—212 © Springer 2005
DOI 10.1007/811038-005-9010-5
HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS
AND FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES FROM A EUROPEAN
PERSPECTIVE
BERNHARD HUFENBACH
ESA DirectOraZe fOr Human Spaceﬂight, M icmgravily and Explmatian, Paris, France
(E—mail: bemhard.hufenbach@esa.int)
GUNTHER SEIBERT
Farmer Manager 0f ESA ’s M icmgravity and Space Slatian Utilisatian Pragrammes,
Paris, France
(E—mail: seibertgu@a0[.60m)
(Accepted 26 May 2005)

Abstract. The past achievements, beneﬁts and future opportunities of human spaceﬂight are discussed
from a European perspective. Earlier work performed on the Skylab, Salyut, Shuttle, Spacelab, and Mir
orbital facilities is reviewed, together with the prospects for new research on the International Space
Station (188). Major scientiﬁc beneﬁts are expected from the 188 in the areas of life science research
(including human physiology and medicine) physical sciences, and fundamental physics.
Keywords: International Space Station, space life sciences, space physical sciences, microgravity, space
medicine, space exploration

1. Historical Background
1.1. INTRODUCTION
The space age began almost 50 years ago, when the former Soviet Union and
the United States, at the peak of the cold war, made tremendous efforts in
meeting the Challenges of sending the ﬁrst satellite and the ﬁrst human being
into low Earth orbit. The ﬁrst extraordinary spaceﬂights were achieved by the
Soviet Union on 4 October 1957 with the launch of the ﬁrst artiﬁcial satellite,
Sputnik 1, and 3.5 years later with the ﬂight of Yuri Gagarin in an Earth
orbit on 12 April 1961. The launch of Sputnik shocked the USA out of its
complacency regarding its technical superiority, and, during the rush to re-
cover the initiative, NASA was formed in 1958. In 1960, announcing NASA’S
Apollo Programme, President Kennedy made the famous statement that it
was an American national objective to land an American on the Moon before
1970, and in July 1969 the world witnessed one of the most spectacular

"
"2","186 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

technical achievements in the history of mankind when this was achieved.
With the successful accomplishment of this objective, the USA demonstrated
their superiority in high technology and conﬁrmed their lead in the space race
with the Soviet Union.

Since the mission of Yuri Gagarin more than 400 people from many
nations have experienced the wonders of seeing our blue planet from space.
Although human exploration and exploitation of space during the second
half of the 20th century was dominated by the former Soviet Union and the
United States, with Europe, Japan and Canada cooperating on various
programmes, notably the International Space Station (188), this fairly
exclusive Club has — in October 2003 — been joined by China the third nation
to launch its ﬁrst “Taikonaut” into orbit.

1.2. THE ORIGIN OF RESEARCH ASSOCIATED WITH HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT

During the 1970’s, the USA and the Soviet Union alone had access to the
environment that eXists in a freely drifting spacecraft, or in an orbiting sa-
tellite. Characterised by it’s weightless or free-fall conditions, with the
gravitational and inertial forces in balance over an extended period, this
“microgravity” environment cannot be produced on Earth for lengthy
periods of time. To achieve it, it is necessary to go into space. The term
microgravity itself reﬂects the reality that true weightlessness, or zero gravity,
is a condition that cannot be achieved in practical systems as the acceleration
of the spacecraft when thrusters are ﬁred, or the friction of a spacecraft with
the residual atmosphere, induces gravitational effects.

Early microgravity experiments made use of a variety of orbiting
spacecraft, mostly manned and with the crew being used as test subjects in
human physiology studies. Following initial testing with animals, the early
human space ﬂights conﬁrmed that there was no immediate danger to life
posed by weightlessness. However, a large number of effects on the function
of heart, lungs, bones, and muscles and nervous system were detected
during early human spaceﬂight missions, which required detailed
investigation because they were seen as potential risks to astronauts on
long-duration spaceﬂight. Most research was initially focused on human
physiology, and was directed towards macroscopic effects on the body.
Later the research was extended to explore Changes at microscopic level i.e.
broadening the research into gravitational biology, exobiology and radia-
tion biology. This meant that studies were performed in space on functional
Changes of cells, tissue, plants, animals and humans, under conditions in
which the effects of gravity are removed. This condition is different from
that on Earth, where life has evolved during the last 3.5 billion years with
the permanently present inﬂuence of the force of gravity.

"
"3","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 187

In addition to research in life sciences, there has also been a considerable
programme of research in ﬂuid- and materials sciences, which is of signiﬁcant
scientiﬁc interest, having the potential for improving industrial processes.
Changes in the behaviour of ﬂuids in space he at the heart of this research as
under microgravity conditions, the basic gravity-induced phenomena of
sedimentation, buoyancy and convection ﬂows and hydrostatic pressure, are
practically absent. By removing gravity-induced effects, experimental con-
ditions can be greatly simpliﬁed and the fundamental processes in ﬂuids can
be more readily explored. Controlling the behaviour of ﬂuids, particularly
regarding heat and mass ﬂow, facilitates a better understanding of, and
subsequently improvements to, a whole range of industrial processes that
depend upon ﬂuids. For example, knowledge gained in space has applications
in metal casting and crystal growth which on Earth is constrained by the
turbulent conditions induced by gravity. Other early research topics included
the study of factors controlling defect generation during growth from the
melt of commercially important materials such as semi-conductors.

Since the early US and Soviet spacecraft were not designed as laboratories
for life and physical sciences studies, there was insufﬁcient space to accom-
modate sophisticated research equipment. This led to the creation, in the
1970’s, of the American Skylab programme and the Soviet Salyut orbital
stations.

1.3. THE SKYLAB AND SALYUT ORBITAL STATIONS

Skylab was a derivative of the third stage of a Saturn-S rocket, modiﬁed to
act as an orbital laboratory. It was large enough (15 m in length, 6.6 m in
diameter) to accommodate three astronauts, 1ife-support equipment, and
research equipment for life and physical sciences, as well as several astron-
omy and Earth observation instruments. This 99 ton orbital station was
launched into a 400 km, 50 degree inclination, orbit in May 1973, and was
Visited by three crews of three astronauts for periods of 28, 60 and 84 days in
1973/ear1y 1974. Skylab remained in orbit, unmanned and with no remote
experimental use for a further 5 years after which, in 1979, NASA executed a
controlled re-entry into the atmosphere.

During these three pioneering Skylab missions, very valuable experiments
in life and physical sciences were carried out, which attracted worldwide
interest in many research ﬁelds. It was demonstrated that this type of
research would lead to advances in fundamental understanding of materials
properties and to discoveries of new life sciences phenomena.

However, a full appraisal of the potential of space life and physical sci-
ences was not possible after these three Skylab missions, because the Skylab
experiments were hasti1y prepared and the furnaces, crystallisation Chambers,

"
"4","188 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

biomedical instruments, etc, were rudimentary when compared with the high
performance facilities developed 1ater (e.g. for Spacelab, see below), and
many potential research areas in life and physical sciences were not addressed
on Skylab at all.

The Soviet Union took its ﬁrst steps in the direction of a space station in
April 1971 with the launch of the Salyut-l orbita1 station, which comprised of
a cylindrical module, 13 m long and 3.6 m in diameter. Several improved
Salyut versions were subsequently launched until 1982. Salyut was Visited by
10 different crews using the Soyuz transfer vehicle, the ﬁnal Visit lasting
100 days. The research results from these missions were not communicated or
published by the Soviets, and it was only after the dissolution of the Soviet
Union that it became known that a large number of space medical investi-
gations and materials research had been carried out on Salyut and that a lot
of optical equipment had been operated on Salyut for military purposes.
1.4. SPACELAB AND ITS EUROPEAN UTILISATION
Although in the 1960s Western Europe had already begun the process of
combining its economic forces, and was the world’s second largest economic
power, Europe played no role in demonstrating technica1 leadership in space
activities. However, the success of the Apollo programme had created a
desire in Europe to participate in the next step of human exploration of
space. Following the NASA announcement in 1972 of the Space Transpor-
tation System (STS) programme, which involved the development of the
Space Shuttle as the major element, ESA’s Member States decided, in 1973,
to develop and contribute SPACELAB as an element of STS, to be built by
European industry. This decision was part of a larger package of decisions
that included the decision to develop the Ariane launcher system and a series
of communication sate11ites. Spacelab became the ﬁrst multi-national, multi-
disciplinary research laboratory routinely used in space by American and
European scientists for scientiﬁc and application oriented research activities.
It proved to be ideally suited for microgravity disciplines, but less so for
disciplines which required speciﬁc orbital and attitude requirements and very
high data rates.

Three modules of Spacelab were available to ﬂy in the cargo bay
of a Space Shuttle. The Long Module (LM) version, which performed sixteen
7—17 day missions during the period 1983—1998, consisted of a 6.5 m long
cylinder-shaped laboratory with a diameter of 4.3 m, and of up to three
external pallets (2.9 m X 4.3 m) that were also accommodated in the Shuttle
cargo bay. With the short module (SM) version of Spacelab, it was possible
to accommodate up to ﬁve external pallets in the Shuttle cargo bay, and the
pa11et-on1y version, which consisted of ﬁve separately accommodated

"
"5","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 189
external pallets, could carry 9300 kg of external payloads. Seven missions
with the SM or pallet-only conﬁguration were ﬂown. In this period, Spacelab
was the workhorse for life and physical sciences for the Western World.
Under the NASA/ESA Spacelab utilisation cooperation agreements
European industry developed about a dozen ESA-funded multi-user life and
physical science experimental facilities for joint European/American use;
NASA contributed the ﬂight and operations costs of Spacelab and these
experimental facilities. With this favourable arrangement for BSA, and
European scientists, these facilities ﬂew on ﬁve NASA Shuttle/Spacelab
missions and on the German D-1 and D-2 Spacelab missions in the period
1985—1998.

Unfortunately, in a period when microgravity research was beginning to
take-off, the tragic accident with the Shuttle Challenger occurred (28 J anuary
1986), leading to a 5-year interruption of Spacelab missions. With the
Spacelab grounded, attention focused on alternative means of accessing
microgravity conditions. Various types of sounding rockets (SR) were used,
providing between 2 and 13 minutes of very good microgravity levels, and
carrying payloads of up to 450 kg some 800 km in vertical parabolic tra-
jectories above the Earth’s atmosphere. These SR short duration ﬂight
opportunities have been maintained as precursor ﬂight opportunities for
microgravity experiments through to today, however at a lower ﬂight
frequency. Other alternative low-graVity ﬂight opportunities, such as para-
bolic airplane ﬂights (25 seconds, however only 0.01 g), drop towers (up to
9.5 seconds, good microgravity levels) and the ﬂight of retrievable capsules,
such as Bion/Foton launched by Soyuz rockets (1 week ﬂight duration,
microgravity levels as on Shuttle/Spacelab) have also been used.

1.5. THE MIR SPACE STATION AND ITS EUROPEAN UTILISATION

Mir, the ﬁrst true, permanently orbiting space station, was assembled during
the period 1986—1996 and became international in it’s utilisation, although it
was owned and operated by the Russian Space Agency (RSA). Consisting of
a Core Module and ﬁve cylindrical research modules, each some 12—13 m in
length and 4.15 m in diameter, Mir’s research capabilities were somewhat
constrained due to its limited data handling capabilities and by its very low
payload return capabilities (only a few kg of samples could be returned to
Earth in Soyuz re-entry capsules, together with crew members). This
situation Changed with the entry into force of a NASA/RSA cooperation
agreement in 1996, which led to regular Visits of the Shuttle to Mir. During its
lifetime, Mir was used for experimental purposes and various European
space agencies, such as CNES, DLR, ASSA (Austria), and NASA, used Mir
on a commercial basis. ESA also used Mir on a commercial basis in 1994

"
"6","190 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
(EUROMIR-94, a 31 days mission) and in 1995 (EUROMIR-95, a 179 days
mission) With its own experimental facilities and astronauts. Utilisation
ceased in 1999, and in 2001 Mir was destroyed in a controlled re-entry into
the Earth’s atmosphere.

Figure 1 shows the major historical milestones of Human Spaceﬂight.
Table I lists all European astronauts ﬂown so far, and Table 11 lists the
number of European life and physical sciences experiments performed in the
period 1971—2004.

Historical Milestones of Human Spaceflight
15%"" . 1"". % ----:--""'I I ""'-.-'.
”2!: _ ' ' 1"" .1-
rﬁﬂ - - n
i’ ' . . .l'.._ ..~:«:.1
vnsrnu l-E‘H HE. ' .'-..~.- ' r_'. 51‘1”“ ""”3
Turiﬁugnrin I I It L' 3HurnnI1HiniIJ-I15in W?!
.Jr' égii'] "" .__ ""J' Finnnling Hilrogtn'lh' Euan'nﬂ-nﬂ
!. He: .. 25:“:-=;'~..-r-‘.-h-.4~.-.
.g Apnilu 19H '- .
. in."" I Luludur FiI1-1Lnn-dil1 ulhm Hurn-nrli . T .1""-
ﬂ I‘1'yﬂtllr'iﬂtai: n:nh: Hum: iI1 Eumm ' ""H'--.___.;1‘-:_‘:""_‘""i
.-| 111.! ‘5‘ I ____.:.-'-I"""" [E-
.:.'.';'i:' 1"". {$119 ‘- +F- ?r';
--’-'*.'._-""-' .—- 'I-_' f _ - - '
MIR Spa m Slnriun ma - Iﬂﬂl 5|“:an f 5p ncuiuh 19334993
Hui mﬁgumﬁm I935“: huhh 'rsiurwe'ﬁim witlﬂiﬂ'rﬂ HW- --'-' 3.1,}
mlﬂrtmﬂelalhl'il'ilﬂ Emilfﬁﬂmhhrlmhndlfhﬁ - .::
"" “~ah- hpmdlmvm
“#3“ ‘1' ""L7“ ._
' "" -..a-I
_ . ha“ "" ' .. i. i'""-:-; __ _ . -+'_'-.'
__ .. ____ I55 1993-24113
:- “Ll- - E“. 531-: languid En1Err-n1i-J-n-JI:{uug-nr-Jli'utninrm nnd1-zvth-nlcug'f picnic“ ::u':-rLIn-d-rr1n|-:t-rl
Hum: r- Brawllqu 1.-:.-u.-rr-t-:-.- Llnmd H:-'.'!I11|:E'I :m
_. .‘ _ _I _ .E'iiI.pan“:'enIIHrE-n-edI..--:-'.-?r:d H-:-.-':ruh:.'?|]|IIII
Figure 1. Some historical milestones in human spaceﬂight.

"
"7","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 191
00 m l0 00 —4 g (\l
l\ Noolnoo 00 ON —< (\1 ON CNN (\1
2 g2§2 ‘3 2 3 3 H 3% 3
—< —< _‘ . _—< —<
0.) ._: O o 9
m EQEZ Q 2 Q g 2 <<5 <5
8 mg“: a o o o a g
I. WW? I. ‘1 T ""r I. L? $
bl) '>'g > g - H H. .
a < 3230 Z 2 O L,“ 2 22 3
>2 \0 VOOBO \o 00 N N 1\ VB M
N NNv—4m N H o N H NN m
\
m \ \ \
I H 2 >—< >—< >—<
22 *5 a g \ 2 2 2
v >\. ,_‘ \ \ \
2 ﬂ :3 \ 01—46061 vm mu-
0 CG (0 [\\0!—1v—1v—1v—1 —<—< —<—<
”—1 m \ llllll II II
*5 :m“? (34 222222 22 22
> @NF ﬁﬁ FFFFFFN FFWFFKO
8 MMVW EEEEEEV gmgm
c2: >»>»>»mmm >»>»>»>»>»>»m >»%m>»>»m
CL 000999 0000009 009009
(A mmmmmm mmmmmmm mmmmmm
8\ B
:23 D «D 5—4
Q18 H 0.)
m 'H a 5
Q a ""g 0 cu
0H CG 0H a
5-4 m m E
H3 g0 (/3 F‘ .2 n8
v—1 | v—1t/J
Lug H O 02 O H 2 .%
qqaﬁ a >FQV—I‘..Q ~v-1 FD v—l* {CD
mo Q'Og *4wa N E :3 (\1 mm Um
OHO H0440.) 5-4 DI“ 5-4 v—1
9% $336 5%a% $3 8 ‘53 <34“ ”‘3 m?)
Q'Hcca’ 8999 H s 5 92H F: Dg
82:34.2 mmmm < >—: < mHE <ﬁ< mm
CL
0
3-4
:
LU on o
a E a m
8 Q a a a
.5 (D s m
:23 LL q \
.2 H 9494 Q) cc>» < E
g Qém (AAA :0 g gag) 94 am
on MHE<EEE<E > Eo<ﬁ < 39% >—<
H M8 :0 m '2 Scum cu m
>—<\./
O UmUQQmU m <<Lu Q m0 <
A
e
A A A A
v5 gﬁv (3 2 5 Q air? a
QVAA g V v v 0.) v v
0.) U—thSZQ) .M ""O +4.2 :3
A °SFOVVOV°S a O '0 CG SOC v-0
Q LQ)‘—‘ mC/JKQ) CG - '—‘ ,—1 OH H
V EFOHCDDD“ Po Po LL Son 2
H'UHVJMA: H 4:: 5-4 .°~O c:
C 0035—4800 :2: Q) Q) 5—4
:51 2:33 O .51 .H 2 Q LEE 2
ﬂ 4 ””2““ m > m"" n: u;
Q) _ |-.-. I - . -
a m eDmoﬁmBe E LL D A AA A
CG A AAAAAAA A A A O V—‘N m
Z —* NMVWKOBN 00 Ch m —< —<—< —<
V vvvvvvv V V V V vv V
m‘
”3 o M N mv to
< v—* Nmﬁ'l/UKOBOO O\ —< —< —< —<—< —<

"
"8","192 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
KO
v%
m m <!- ox—‘WD \o l\ l\ 00
o o o m_0 xom Ch mho
2 Q 2 2 ~92 32 2 ago
>» a - - 533;; M- g >»#H
ct: _ 8 g omcc 4% cs: “3’6
2 3 O z chz 3m 2 2033
\0 V N
9 a $ 3 73$ 3? $ $83
. . | -“ . |- . II
I . >. .CD >~.-.
3—4 . O H ,_0 q v-Q CESCLQ
a < 3 Q o Z£m 3< LL 2%:2‘
Q) \o —< N m mmN O1\ 0 lama
V—1 V—1 V—1
>"" N o o o CON N NN
a \ a \ \
2 >—1 >—1 2 >—1 >—1
22 \ 2 2 \ 2 2
V \ \ \ \
2 no em N wmmv no
0 TT 9'“. ‘T‘ ‘T‘CT'cT'CT' “.""T'
f) 22 22 2 2222 22
> m FEM FFKOFW OOFFFFVKOFF
8 l? §§9 §§9§> Frggggwwgg
:2: m >»>»m >>m>m m>n>n>n>nmm>n>n
CL F 00% OOFOF 900009900
:0 m mmm mmmmm mmmmmmmmm
A
B 2
3 m V—l‘
.g < 8 mm
Q4 0.) >—<>—<
o\ a
8% < m 00
F HH
H E a m 8‘? 2 EE
LU <3 0 ﬁ' HWEO"" ' coco
*4 3541) N 8 0‘ mag: cg ﬂag
on o ' 223m Umwm
<5: G D.SH Chnﬁmp go 22
F ..O 9.22 I213 ,_Q~cu 3:333
CFO CG Q)> m DE c2394 1\ 55
ow ~ H ~50 {OH #0 9 4:420
~~O cu .H ,_0 cum) cu...‘ :12
am 0 a 43mm qmgw om o: mmw
a§ a x 54.): 9:33?) 3% H 42:39
2:: m < mﬂm <meo¢ mo 2 SKA
ad
a a A
0: Q Q
(:3 \
m \
E :3 m E m
b—t
a“ §< 2 § § ﬁﬁﬁ mZZ < ﬁzz
O LUQ U LU LU LULULU <00 Q LUUU
A
LL
V
A A A A a
$2 E; m ”u? E An: ”LEE
UQAM U a V U Qm'ﬁm A VVA
VVQH v v %A\/ VVQ) D >an""
Hﬁvg 3—4 OQHQ-HHQ 00V
~28)th .2 E EV.2VQDI v 3'33
@283 $3 0 25%ﬁ8'5‘8 9 2‘8E
onTcm o 63 oxomsﬁw g USS
zaa- Z D '33206 Q m -U>‘
-'-O-"" -2 UT..--”.;. .Urq'g
cu UEDP; U :5 2902320 o: ALA
a AAAA A AAAAAAA A AHA
CG VWKOB <!- A OOQVI'OV—‘Nm ?l' OOﬂxl/U
Z SSS: 3 S3 $338839) CL $959)
:5
”3 \onooox o M vamxonoo ox c>~N
<ﬁ ~~~~ N N NNNNNNN N mmm

"
"9","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 193
ooC'ﬁ Ch 0—4 (\l (\l v
ONQ oﬁoN
mmog Sooooggg
ﬁﬁgﬁ ngmgmom
3%“.8' 8§g§aégé \o
Z<EQ MEQEEZQ< 8

00 l\ (\1—1 V3 C3
?waw w9$9$$$w 8 S
_.|. O 0-)
aﬁgB gaaagaaa S ”
OLT-‘r—aQ LD<O<HOO<C cgggggg
memo ﬁmﬁmmoooox CLc> coco
NNNM ﬁﬁmmomwvﬁ <NZNNNN

(\l
v.
55 FE
NN
NN

m aa 3% \o

H 00 0H

2 :28 mm” N;

\\

a R? ﬁwg :9

(\1 mm <<>n om

I ll 0 m\

2 m OEEMEEQ 52o mm
mFmo QOFFHFFOO ﬁﬁﬁgmmg
CDINNCDINv—l4 O'Nv—I4NNv—I4NNN NNv—l4HvT‘v—l*+—>
macaw mmaamaaa aammmmm
FOFF‘ FFOOF‘OOO COEFEFE
mmmm mmmmmmmm mmmmmmm

a

a g

""o

9 2 *3 egg
g QH g ”8.30
5 8&4: >\, 9%Q:

on 5H
moo ”—42.H Lu IDS
00 ""-‘Am LL ,4 02%
”—1 2< “DH
$5 ”8C3 D 'ci 9 ""0'03
94% EHI E :A ? xgg
I'D ""U'E‘DDOCD gQ '5 2M3:

m.ﬁwﬁ'“ V

.-0 NH ,OQ: m0 C3 QHE>3

c2: cam mu®m% 3‘32 Ms :3:
EmHD 0mg qu'oﬂ OH O‘D'Bcc

:""OM ﬁmOOc/JCD mg: >—< F128
Bagﬁ 3~aewaggg m2< 80m
533-4 3 wwwhﬁ I'UO“""U
mmUE m5<ﬁ2fﬂOUQU LULUSCSIEv—«CSI

< < g ”3“

m < m LU<2

Lu :0 Lu<ﬁ “m“ <

“ LU “m Em# :0

mm a mmdeB LU
<mm< ﬁ<m4mysﬁ< 4<<<<<<
mZZm mZmZogom mmmmmmm
Luoom Qmo<ﬁomm2m <mmmmmm

A A

EAEE A a 3 a
mDVHEQ.H~DQEng COED
VED'E.2>V=5.‘:V=VE ?:vw
§°a==528=8=g3a 3:358
wmw85-9°~-3‘3H'= cr-~ spam)

3 CM sswﬂsoss wig“):
QmEZmFUE>mQQM §>Mm
mAEOAUDUmmmm< $09490.
AAAAAAAAAAAAA QAAA
KOBNVOOBHMOOONOKOH Goomm'O'O'd'd
(\l—‘v—‘HHNNNNNMNM SN~m££££
VVVVVVVVVVVVV QVVVHHHH

E
mvmwhooONOv—‘Nmﬁ'ln SKOBOOQOHN
mmmmmmmvvvvvv vvvvwmm

"
"10","194 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
3‘_
gm: v—4m—4 WHNNV mohmmov—«mow
>‘F
m
m
b—1
\
.3:
gm
3 SH 2
450 m2
a
H
8 4..
H S
B 3*
0) CG
a CO mm 0—4—4
'0
a
:2:
m 2
a
.2 ED
% .23
a Hm
6% y—4 H H m (\l V 00
E 940
on
a
8
b—1
mm ®~
A: EB
mg 23 ~36:
E: mm
£1
a
o
m \
5 $33
>»
E QM
5 <ﬁm HMH m
CL
><
0.)
g .2
Q) v—1
0
3 £3
5—4 C34:
5 son ~ N:~°m:
52 mm:
o
H
0.)
""Q on
S am
z 813+.»
8 mg
m 3o v—‘v—‘v—‘O GONBBMOOKOVBV
(2‘.ng v—1v—1 v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1 HMNN
H
E
Q)
E
E
“9
Q)
m
E
S
Q)
.§
k
g &HNMVW©I\OO©O—<NMVWKOI\OO©O
Q) RBBBBBBBBBOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQ
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm
>4 mﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁ

"
"11","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 195
KOOOVKOOOOHKOQNQWOOVM
MOMOWMMNHv—«v—«ooﬁ-oﬁ

—<—< N
—<

w—<[\©v—400

—<(\]—<(\ll\

WBMWKO v—4 m m
v—<(\]v—4(\IN N
—<

m

—<

v-«ln l\\o m —< Ch (\1
(\l —< —< (\l —<
—<

WMOOMVI'NVI'OO —‘ m
mﬁﬁ'ﬁm—‘ﬁ \o
m

00

QMOOV—‘VM HBMNMOOM
—<—< NNKOO

(\l

\ONmHmN OOVI'VI'l/UBKOl/Um
(\1—1—1 —1
m

v—1

CG

4.)

O

F

0.)

>

'33

CG

3
Hmmﬁ-mxohoomOHNmﬁ-a
QQQQQQQQQOOOOO:
QQQQQQQQQOOOOO
v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1v—1NNNNNU

"
"12","196 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

2. The 188 and its European Utilisation
2.1. 188 FEATURES
The 188 is the biggest orbital platform ever built, and the largest interna-
tional technical project in the history of mankind. Upon the invitation of
then-President Reagan, 10 European countries, represented through ESA,
cooperate With the United States, Russia, Japan and Canada in the devel-
opment of 188, Which since 1998 has been in its assembly phase. Following
the Shuttle Columbia accident in February 2003 this assembly has been
interrupted, but it Will be resumed in summer 2005 With the Shuttle return to
ﬂight. At present the 188 is operated by a two-astronaut crew With a reduced
level of support for research purposes. Astronaut and logistic transport is
presently performed by Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles.

At completion the Station Will have a total mass of over 400 tons and
dimensions of about 100 m X 75 m. Out of a total electrical power of 110 kW
some 47 kW Will be available for research purposes and it Will be permanently
manned by up to 6 astronauts. From a research point of View, the most
important elements of the 188 are its ﬁve laboratories and the external
experimental platforms. The US Laboratory “DESTINY” is already in use,
but in 2004 NASA decided to delete some of its originally planned ISS
elements (in particular the US Habitation Module and a new 188 Crew
Return Vehicle). The laboratories of the other Space Station Partners are
currently awaiting launch; these are:

0 The European “Columbus” Laboratory With its External Payload
Facility, Whose launch is currently planned in October 2006

0 The J apanese Pressurised Experiment Module “JEM” With the Exposed
Facility and Robotic Manipulator System (RMS)

0 The Russian Research Module (RM), Which is presently in its
development phase

0 The Russian Multipurpose Laboratory Module (MLM), Which is also in
its development phase

The Canadian contribution to 188, the 188 Remote Manipulator (con-
sisting of a Mobile Remote Servicer Base System, Mobile Transporter,
Mobile Servicing System and the Canadarm) is already onboard the 188.

The most important elements of the European contribution to the 188
are:

(1) The multidisciplinary research laboratory, Columbus. This a pressurised
module, 6.7 m long and 4.5 m in diameter With a total mass of 15 tons,
ﬁve of Which are comprised of research equipment. It is equipped With

"
"13","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 197
both internal and external multi-user research facilities and offers a
highly ﬂexible research facility in space, in Which user experiments may
be carried out With the assistance of astronauts Who can live and work in
a shirtsleeve environment. Inside Columbus, there Will be ten
exchangeable payload racks (four along each side and two at the ceil-
ing). Almost all of the experimental equipment Within the pressurised
module Will be dedicated to life and physical sciences. At launch,
Columbus Will be equipped With the following ESA multi-user facilities:
BIOLAB, Fluid Science Lab (FSL), European Physiology Modules
(EPM) and the European Drawer Rack (EDR). On the outside of
Columbus there is an External Payload Facility (CEPF) Which has four
locations for the accommodation of external payloads for space science,
Earth observation, and fundamental physics and technology payloads
(see below). The two external ESA payloads, European Technology
Exposure Facility (EuTEF) and the SOLAR observatory, Will be
launched With the same Shuttle ﬂight in 2007 as Columbus, but Will be
carried separately and accommodated in orbit on the CEPF.In addition
to the experimental facilities and instruments accommodated in
Columbus, ESA has developed a Materials Science Lab (MSL), a
European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS), a Pulmonary Function
System (PFS), and a few other life science instruments such as a Muscle
Atrophy Research and Exercise System (MARES), a Percutaneous
Electrical Muscle Stimulator (FEMS), and a Hand-Grip Dynamometer
(HGD). Based on a special ESA/NASA agreement these ESA facilities
Will be, or are already, accommodated and jointly used in the US
Destiny laboratory.

(2) The Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). This is an ISS supply vehicle
Whose purpose is to deliver payloads, propellants, crew supplies and
various commodities, as well as to periodically re-boost the 188 to its
nominal orbital altitude from Which it is dragged down due to friction
With the residual atmosphere.

(3) Other European contributions to 188 include:

0 The European Robotic Arm (ERA), Which is to be attached to the

Russian segment of 188 in 2007
0 Nodes 2 and 3 of the ISS infrastructure, Which are to be launched in

September 2006 and May 2008
0 The Data Management System (DMS-R) for the Russian Segment

of 188, Which was launched in 2000 as a core part of Russia’s Zvezda

module

0 The Cupola, a truncated hexagonal pyramid (the Closest shape to a
spherical dome) With ﬂat Windows. The Cupola Will provide external
Views for controlling the robotic operations of the 188 Remote

"
"14","198 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
Manipulator and allow monitoring of crew space walks. It Will also
permit scientiﬁc and crew observation of Earth and celestial bodies
0 The Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG), a multi-purpose, multi-
user experimental support facility, Which is accommodated, and in
use, in the US Lab since June 2002
0 A minus 800C freezer (MELFI), of Which ESA has already delivered
four ﬂight units to NASA and JAXA (the J apanese Space Agency)
0 Hexapod, a pointing platform for external payloads
0 A refrigeration system (Cryosystem), for Which launch is planned no
earlier than 2008
2.2. EUROPEAN UTILISATION OF 188
The space environment of an orbiting platform, Which includes as major
physical feature the absence of gravity, makes the 188 a unique large
extraterrestrial laboratory. The 188 is ideally suited for research in life
and physical sciences, Which create knowledge of great importance for
terrestrial applications. In addition, the attitude and orbit of the 188 are
well-suited for a variety of space science and Earth observation inves-
tigations. The Utilisation Plan of ISS foresees regular access to and
from the Station, allowing for iterative research in short time scales.
The laboratories of the 188, With their numerous research facilities and
instruments, offer the following opportunities for basic and applied
research:
0 Materials Science, including solidiﬁcation physics, crystal growth and
ﬂuid physics
0 Fundamental physics, including cold-atom and quantum physics,
complex plasmas, and the physics of dust particles
0 Life sciences, including human physiology, space medicine, space
biology, radiation biology and biotechnology
0 Space science and Earth observation on external platforms, Which point
both to deep space and towards the Earth
Furthermore, the 188 is ideally suited for technology demonstrations,
by housing and testing new technologies and products in the space
environment. Additionally, the 188 may be used as an education platform
because of the various scientiﬁc activities performed, its high public
Visibility, and the presence of astronauts Who can act as teachers from
space.
The “European Utilisation Plan for the International Space Station”
(ESA document SP-1270) provides details on ESA’s 188 research plan.
Based on several Announcements of Research Opportunities (AO’s) ESA

"
"15","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 199
has selected, with the help of international peer review groups, 252 Basic
Research proposals, and 45 Microgravity Application Projects (MAP’s), for
the 188.

The MAP Programme was launched by ESA about 10 years ago to
involve non-space industry in joint projects with scientists from universities/
research institutes. Today there are 45 European MAP’s, which are typi-
cally ﬁnanced one-third by industry, one-third by BSA, and one-third by
universities and research institutes which normally provide the Principal
Investigators. Of the 45 MAPS, 26 are from life sciences and 19 from
physical sciences; 145 companies participate actively in these MAPS, and
more than 1000 European scientists are involved in the selected research
projects.

3. Achievements, Beneﬁts and Future of Human Spaceﬂight
3.1. LIFE SCIENCE
3.1.1. Space biology, radiation biology and biotechnology
The main objective of space biology is to study the effects of gravity and
radiation on cells, tissues and whole-body development and reproduction.
The results of space experiments have shown altered gene expression and
signal transduction, Changes in membrane composition and functioning, as
well as Changes to energy metabolism and cell proliferation. Chromosomal
abnormalities have also been detected, as well as disturbances in the
partitioning of genetic material in some experiments on plants cells. By the
use of centrifuges in space variable gravity levels can be applied, and
ESA’s Biorack experiment, which has ﬂown siX times, had variable 0 to
1 g centrifuges to investigate gravity sensitivity and thresholds for these
effects. These Biorack experiments demonstrated that certain cell activities
were already reduced or even inhibited at 0.3 g, but that the metabolic
functions of osteob1ast cells are fully recovered by 1 g centrifugation in
space. This is very important for manned missions to Mars, where the
gravity level is 0.38 g; this result is also important for studies on osteo-
porosis and its cure or prevention on Earth. At the tissue level, altered
ce11—Ce11 relations have been observed in stable and controlled ﬂuidic sys-
tems in space.

The successor of the Spacelab Biorack facility, the ISS facility Biolab, also
includes variable g centrifuges, which will be used for 1 g reference experi-
ments and threshold measurements on various cell types, plants and other
organisms. Studies are planned on the 188 to Clarify how far subtle gravity-
induced modiﬁcations are due to different mechanical and biochemical

"
"16","200 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
micro-environments. Speciﬁcally, on the 188 it is planned to address and
understand:

0 Mechanisms of cell proliferation and differentiation

0 Effects of mechanical loading

0 Role of the cytoskeleton on signal transduction

0 Graviperception and g-level threshold detection

With respect to future long-term human space missions to Moon and
Mars it is of utmost importance to develop, not only adequate counter-
measures to reduce the effects of low gravity, but also to perform research
into the effects of space radiation on the human body. In order to obtain
precise radiation data, the German Aerospace Centre DLR, together with
BSA, have developed the radiation biology payload Matroshka. This is a
body radiation-dosage measurement unit, Which was mounted externally on
the Russian Service Module of the 188 in February 2004. It is a tissue-
equivalent phantom representing the upper part of the human torso, and is
composed of natural bone and of various tissue substitutes simulating the
human body as far as size, shape, orientation, mass density and nuclear
interactions are concerned. At the sites of the body organ locations, such as
stomach, lungs, colon, eyes and skin, spaces are provided at the surface and
at different depths Within the phantom to accommodate dosimeter packages
to measure ionising radiation. Knowledge of the radiation dosage to Which
sensitive organs of astronauts are exposed is very important for evaluating
the risks from radiation on the ISS, especially during extra-vehicular activi-
ties, and for future long-duration space missions. The data gathered Will be
used to reduce uncertainties in risk estimates for radiation-induced cancer,
and for the reﬁnement of the shielding needs for vehicles used for future long-
duration missions. They also have important implications for 188 crew health
and mission planning.

Biotechnology ranges from genetic enhancement of agricultural plants, to
the understanding of the impact of the micro-environment on cells and
tissues for bio-organ and tissue engineering. In the domain of Biotechnology
on the 188 it is planned to investigate the inﬂuence of microgravity on trans-
membrane and intracellular ﬂux mediators controlling differentiation, cell-
matriX interaction and cell potency. Studies in space are needed to determine
the inﬂuence of gravity on the processing and ampliﬁcation of signals in cells,
cell aggregation, tissue and Whole organisms. Advancements of these
fundamental aspects are important for transplantation of tissue and organs,
and for the growth of tissue samples outside the body (e.g. for the replace-
ment of human organs and tissue by in vitro grown tissue material and
organs). Cell and organ cultures open up new ways to prevent and to treat
diseases, and previous bioreactor experiments in space have shown improved

"
"17","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 201
growth of 3-dimensional tissues. On the 188 it is planned to grow skin and
liver tissues, and even cancer tumours, with the prospect of applications for
transplantation of artiﬁcial tissue and organ-like structures and the
production of pharmaceutical agents. Plant tissue culturing experiments
using bioreactors in space may also have applications in agriculture. About
50 European companies cooperate with research institutes in ESA-selected
Microgravity Application Projects in the ﬁeld of biotechnology and
biomedical applications (see ESA BR-141).

3.1.2. Human physiology and space medicine

(a) Cardiovascular System Changes in Space: Among the ﬁrst Changes
observed in astronauts was a de-conditioning of the cardiovascular system,
similar to that developing in the normal ageing process on Earth. An upward
displacement of up to two litres of body ﬂuid, when entering weightlessness,
was followed by an increased ﬂuid and electrolyte excretion by the kidneys,
increased pumping of the heart, and a redistribution and reduction in blood
plasma. In addition there is an apparent depression of the immune system’s
response to infection.

Research in space of these processes constitutes a valuable tool to extend
the understanding of blood pressure mechanisms, blood constituents, and of
basic body ﬂuid regulation involving heart, kidneys and the glandular system.
The investigation of aging symptoms and de-conditioning arising in space in
young healthy astronauts allows the development and testing of counter-
measures, using subjects free from other complicating Characteristics.

(b) Respiratory System Changes in Space: Changes in the Chest-wa11
mechanics, and relative displacement of the rib cage and the abdominal
compartments, have been detected as the consequence of entering into the
microgravity of space. The details of lung ventilation and blood perfusion
patterns in weightlessness will be the subject of research projects on astro-
nauts on the 188.

(C) Bone M ass Loss in Space: To understand the detected acute bone mass
loss of about 1% per month in load carrying bones of astronauts, research
projects have been started to study processes atce11u1ar, tissue, molecular and
hormonal level. Since, so far, no end of the bone loss in space has been
detected, and since this effect is partially irreversible, this is probably the
most dangerous physiological Change observed in response to microgravity.
Bone loss goes along with loss of mass in related muscles, and with the risk of
kidney stones and calciﬁcation of tissues in the long-term. The dynamic
equilibrium between bone growth and destruction/resorption is disturbed by
the Changed mechanical stress of the bone and by altered segregation activ-
ities of hormones and Changed eﬂciciency of Vitamins in the blood. Bone
renewal is performed by specialised bone cells, the osteoclasts, which remove
old bone, and osteob1asts, which generate new bone. Space experiments have

"
"18","202 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

shown that exposure to weightlessness of 1—2 weeks results in increased
osteoclasts activity and decreased activity of osteoblasts. On the 188, the
ERISTO (European Research in Space and Terrestrial Osteoporosis) MAP
project is oriented towards biochemistry at cellular and Whole organism-level
including genetic mechanisms. The knowledge gained by this research Will
probably contribute to ease the severe problem of osteoporosis of elderly
people on Earth (it is estimated that about 50% of women and 15% of men
above 50 years of age suffer from a fracture of hip, wrist or spine due to
osteoporosis).

(d) M uscle Atrophy in Space: Past space experiments have shown that in
muscles the physiological Changes induced by microgravity comprise loss of
mass, force, power and increased muscle fatigue. On Earth muscle atrophy is
a consequence of bed conﬁnement, casting, injury and trauma, reduced
physical activity and ageing. The space environment provides a unique
environment to study the effects of long-term muscle disuse on muscle
function, physical performance and health. Research projects that include the
development and testing of countermeasures on 188 astronauts are under-
way. In the past, the limited number of astronauts available as test subjects
was a problem, but this should no longer be the case When the ISS crew
consists of siX astronauts. The countermeasures under consideration are
resistance exercise, lower-body negative pressure, aerobic exercise, penguin-
suits, drug treatment, electric stimulation and ﬂywheel ergometer exercises.
ESA has developed two facilities for this research on the ISS, namely:
MARES (the Muscle Atrophy Research and Exercise System), and FLY-
WHEEL Which Will measure muscle strength of all major muscle groups.
These Will be used to evaluate, in space, the effectiveness of different
countermeasures regimes, Which are of critical importance for long-duration
space missions.

(e) Changes 10 the Nervous System/Human Sensory and Balance S yslem in
Space: The nervous system is one of the areas most affected by gravity. It is
the most complex and least understood part of the human body and includes
the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves and the sensory organs. This system
controls blood pressure, maintains balance and posture, coordinates
movements and regulates sleep. Entering microgravity, astronauts suffer a
disturbance of their vestibular system, their acceleration sensing system,
Which is accompanied for most astronauts by a motion sickness known as
“Space Sickness”, Which lasts for about 3 days. This is caused by the pro-
vision of inconsistent information from the eyes and the vestibular system.
After 3 days the nervous system has learned orientation With Visual inputs
alone. Research in the ﬁeld of motion and posture has made major progress
in the last 20 years, mainly due to access to the microgravity environment.
Millions of people suffering balance disorders on Earth have beneﬁted from
the unique insight that vestibular research in space has gained, and from the

"
"19","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 203
Clinical use of new diagnostic instruments such as the Video oculograph,
human rotators/centrifuges, and 3-D eye trackers that have been developed
in Europe for research in microgravity. For example, the 3-D eye tracker has
found Wide application in eye Clinics for strabismus/squinting operations of
swivel-eyed Children
3.2. PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND APPLICATIONS IN SPACE
Gravity induced phenomena play an important role in many ﬁelds of physical
sciences. The European physical science activities under microgravity con-
ditions have predominantly been performed in the frame of Shuttle/Spacelab
missions, and by short duration precursor experiments With various types of
sounding rocket in the 1980’s and 1990’s. This research had been deliberately
focussed by the scientiﬁc community upon selected topics that combine sci-
entiﬁc interest With the potential for improving industrial processes. The
transfer of results to terrestrial applications from two decades of micro-
gravity research on board Spacelab, MIR and sounding rockets has now
begun. This transfer concerns fundamental knowledge on physical processes
in metals, crystal growth, ﬂuids and combustion, and continuing research in
these ﬁelds on the 188 Will accelerate the transfer rate.

The achievements, and future plans, of some selected areas of research are
outlined below:

3.2.1. Solidiﬁcalion processes

In solidiﬁcation processes from a melt the growing microstructure of the
solid determines the physical properties (e.g. the mechanical, electrical,
Chemical and magnetic Characteristics) of the material. The control of
material structure during the liquid-to-solid phase transition is absolutely
crucial for the quality and reliability of materials produced, for example, in
the foundry and casting industry. Past experiments in microgravity have
yielded better uniformity and lower defect densities of the solidiﬁed materials.
On the 188 it is planned to investigate the processes at the phase interface
such as melt ﬂow, under-cooling, solidiﬁcation velocity, curvature etc and the
role that gravity plays in these processes.

Another important aspect for research on solidiﬁcation processes is the
validation of numerical models. In industry many models have been devel-
oped to simulate the ﬂow ﬁelds in metallic melts, but experimental methods
to verify these models are either totally missing or very complicated to
evaluate due to gravity-induced turbulence phenomena. Processing metallic
melts under weightlessness in a space laboratory could help to validate these
models and to verify their reliability.

"
"20","204 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
3.2.2. T hermO-physical properties

On Earth the measurement accuracies of thermo-physical properties are in
the order of 50—100%, Which presents a major problem for industry Which
vigorously demands better input data for their numerical simulations. Only
With data of higher accuracy can improvements in casting control, efﬁciency
and product-quality be achieved. With levitation techniques (used to elimi-
nate contacts between highly reactive metallic melts and a crucible) in
microgravity, Where the electromagnetic or electro-static positioning forces
needed for levitation are about three orders of magnitude smaller than on
Earth, strongly improved accuracy (by up to a factor of 10) in the determi-
nation of thermo-physical properties of metal melts can be achieved. In
addition, the smaller positioning energy needed in space makes it possible to
enlarge the temperature range (i.e. to the range 400—22000C), so that it covers
a variety of commercial alloys (e.g. aluminium, copper, titanium, steel and
nickel alloys).

On the 188 the thermo-physical properties to be measured Will be: melting
range, density, surface tension, Viscosity, heat capacity and enthalpy, thermal
conductivity and diffusivity, and electrical conductivity. In metallurgical
industries the major applications of such improved thermo-physical data are
in the production/casting of iron, steel, and a Wide range of alloys. In Europe,
more than 10 million tons of castings are produced per annum, generating a
turnover of 18 billion Euros. The competitiveness of the European companies
relies upon the industry’s ability to produce higher performance materials
and to improve processing practices.

3.2.3. Crystal growth of semiconductor materials

Single crystals of semiconductors are the very basis of the electronic age.
Electronic components such as integrated Circuits are made of semiconductor
wafers of single crystals. Single crystals are grown from a melt, from solution,
or from vapour. Unfortunately single crystals often contain defects and
dislocations in the regular layer of atoms, as well as inclusions and impurities.
Technical applications require continuously increased device densities to
reduce mass and volumes (e.g. of mobile phones) and fewer defects to
increase their technical performance. On Earth gravity induced heat and
mass ﬂow inﬂuences the growth process and crystal perfection and the
number and density of defects. The main reason for performing crystal
growth experiments in space is to understand the basic transport mechanisms
that determine the ﬁnal properties of the crystal grown. The microgravity
environment provides the ultimate conditions for controlling the transport
phenomena in crystallisation processes that are characterised by diffusion
controlled heat and mass transfer.

Past experiments on Spacelab distinguished between gravity induced
convection and surface tension induced ﬂows. Much larger crystals of

"
"21","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 205
gallium arsenide than are possible on Earth have been grown, and it is also
possible to generate and stabilise the large liquid ﬂoating zones needed to
grow larger single crystals of silicon, the material from which most electronic
components are made. Crystal growth in space makes it possible to prepare
samples showing the intrinsic (i.e. the best possible) properties of the semi-
conductor materials. Such benchmark samples are invaluable for assessing
the required investment in the development of new semiconductor devices.
An example of this is the planned growth of CdTe single crystals on the 188,
the basic material used in highly sensitive X-ray and gamma ray detectors.
The objective is low-dosage X-ray irradiation of patients, and more sensitive
identiﬁcation of ﬂaws in high performance materials.

3.2.4. Fluid science in space

Based on results from past experiments in space it is planned to perform
measurements on the 188 of heat transfer, mass exchange and Chemical
processes in multiphase systems and supercritical ﬂuids. Also diffusive
processes in mixtures will be measured and the stability of foams and
emulsions investigated. Applications of this research include the development
of reactors for supercritical oxidation of industrial contaminants and high-
efﬁciency heat exchangers, as well as the improvement of reactor design in
industrial plants and of oil recovery techniques.

A practical example of ﬂuid science applications is the enhancement of
crude oil recovery methods. Crude oil is one of the most important re-
sources on Earth, because our power generation and transportation de-
pends largely on reﬁned petroleum, and because a wide variety of products
are made from petrochemicals. Crude oil is a non-renewable resource and
therefore oil companies are continuously seeking ways to recover as much
as possible from existing sources, and to exploit new reservoirs more efﬁ-
ciently. Near-surface reservoirs are almost depleted and at present it is
necessary to drill to a depth of 7 km to ﬁnd new oil deposits. When a new
reservoir has been found, a large number of very expensive (up to 100
million Euro each, if offshore) exploratory wells will normally need to be
drilled to determine the size of the reservoir and the composition of the
crude oil. In order to reduce the number of drills, petrochemical companies
try to apply thermodynamic models. These require geophysical/geological
data, but most importantly they also require precise data on isothermal
diffusion coefﬁcients and thermo-diffusion (Soret) coefﬁcients of a few crude
oil samples from the reservoir. The crude oil at such depths is under very
high pressure (500 bars) and high temperatures, so that the conditions are
supercritical below 4 km. In addition the crude oil is a multi-component
organic mixture for which diffusion coeﬂﬁcient measurements do not eXist
but need to be made. Since the accuracy of laboratory measurements on
Earth is affected by gravity-induced buoyancy and convection, it is not

"
"22","206 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

possible to conduct the diffusion coeﬂﬂcient measurements that distinguish
more than two components of the crude oil. This problem has been over-
come in the past by measurements of these coefﬁcients during space mis-
sions in microgravity and oil companies are very interested that such
measurements continue on the 188.

3.2.5. Combustion

Combustion is the process of transforming Chemical energy into thermal
energy (heat). This process is Vital for our daily lives for both industrial and
domestic use. Gas driven turbines produce electricity, gas ﬁres heat build-
ings, and gas combustion powers cars, ships, aircraft and rockets.
Humanity is currently dependent on ﬁnite, non-renewable fossil fuels for
energy and heating. The combustion of fossil fuels is inherently connected
With the production of pollutants as exhaust by-products. Some of these,
such as carbon monoxide and soot, are harmful to humans. Others, such as
carbon dioxide, and oxides of sulphur and nitrogen, are involved in com-
plex Chemical reactions in the atmosphere Which inﬂuence global Climate.
The world consumption of fossil fuels is expected to rise in the coming
decades. Therefore it is imperative that industry does its utmost to increase
combustion efﬁciency and reduce pollution. However, present numerical
software models designed to solve these problems are of very limited use-
fulness, since experimental data obtained on the ground are inﬂuenced by
gravity-induced convection and natural diffusion, making optimal solutions
difﬁcult. On Earth, strong convection and buoyancy forces disturb the
combustion processes because a large temperature rise during combustion
leads to dramatic local density Changes, and often to turbulent ﬂows in and
around the ﬂames.

The microgravity environment enables the study of stable ﬂames, Which
signiﬁcantly helps the understanding of fundamental physical and Chemical
processes involved in combustion, and facilitates better mathematical
modelling. This in turn leads to an optimisation of combustion processes on
Earth. Data from past experiments under microgravity conditions have
resulted in marked improvements of the simulation models used in industrial
combustion process design. Past microgravity combustion experiments, and
related modelling, have led to a new understanding of basic combustion
phenomena, and the role of the different heat- and mass-transfer parameters
in convection, diffusion and radiation is now much better understood. Future
planned experiments on the 188 Will involve droplet and spray evaporation,
auto-ignition conditions, and soot formation in ﬂames. In line With the
political guidelines for protection of the Earth’s environment, the principal
research objective is to improve combustion efﬁciency and to reduce
pollution by power plants and engines.

"
"23","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 207
3.2.6. Fundamental physics

There is now a growing interest in using microgravity to investigate var-
ious aspects of fundamental physics. Research projects in the ﬁeld of complex
plasmas already started in the mid-1990’s With sounding rockets, the Space
Shuttle (STS-95 in 1995), and recently on the ISS, and these Will be extended.
Experiments on cold atoms/atomic Clocks in space and on the interaction of
cosmic and atmospheric particles are also planned on the 188. Some of these
experiments are described below.

(a) Complex Plasmas: Although plasma is one of the major constituents of
the Universe it is not Widely recognised on Earth since it is made up of
invisible, Charged particles. In the last 10 years, worldwide scientiﬁc interest
in “complex plasmas” has been growing as researchers have discovered new
and unusual liquid and crystalline plasma states. Complex plasmas consist of
ions, electrons and Charged micro-particles (each individually Visible because
they are about 50,000 times larger than a plasma ion) Which enable scientists
to visualise the kinetics of plasmas for the ﬁrst time. These micro-particles
also increase the complexity of the plasma and slow down the plasma
dynamics. In this state, the plasma physics becomes optically observable With
a powerful microscope, and allows investigation of the liquid and crystalline
plasma states. However, since the micro-particles are relatively heavy, gravity
is the dominant destructive force in these complex plasmas. Therefore pre-
cursor experiments have been performed under microgravity conditions using
sounding rockets and Shuttle ﬂights, and recently on the 188. These experi-
ments have allowed scientists to study many aspects of complex plasmas,
such as the 3-D self—organisation of matter, ﬂuid physics at particle level, ﬂow
around obstacles and through a constriction (nano-jets), interpenetrating
ﬂows, coalescence of two liquids, plasma drops, crystal growth at the particle
level, interfacial melting, etc. At the early state of this research all of these
experiments need specially trained astronauts to adjust parameters, update or
exchange equipment, and observe the experiment. Recent experiments on the
ISS resulted in the discovery of coagulation of micro-particles to super-
aggregates. Numerous applications on Earth are expected from this research.
Examples include nano-particle ﬁltering for Cleaning contaminated ﬂuids,
plasma deposition for improved surface coatings (e.g. self—lubricating sur-
faces), the design of new composite materials, polymer solar cells, and bio-
plasma physics (e.g. sorting of bacteria for cell cultures and the killing of
harmful bacteria).

(b) Cold Aloms/Alomic Clocks in Space: The European plan to
accommodate the ACES (Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space) on the
external platform of the Columbus Laboratory is of considerable impor-
tance in the context of both fundamental and applied physics. The laser-
Cooled atomic Clock Will provide ultra-precise measurements of time,
attaining accuracy levels 10—100 times higher than on Earth. The laser light

"
"24","208 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
cooling reduces the thermal velocity of atoms to a few centimetres per
second, Which corresponds to a temperature of 1 micro Kelvin. Under
microgravity conditions the caesium atoms remain at these velocities, While
on Earth the gravitational acceleration increases their speed rapidly (in
0.1 second to 1 m per second) When the lasers are switched off for signal
interrogation. This leads, in space, to a narrow resonance and a high signal
to noise ratio. Thus laser cooling in microgravity results in a 100—1000
times longer interaction time than on Earth. It is expected that this atomic
Clock Will reach a frequency stability that is one to two orders of magni-
tude better than can be achieved With the most advanced Clocks on Earth.
Atomic Clocks in space are of particular interest in future navigation sys-
tems (e.g. Galileo), Where the accuracy of a navigation system depends
directly on the timing accuracy of its reference Clock. They Will also pro-
vide a unique, universal time reference for basic physics (e.g. Checks of
relativity theory) and other applications such as geodesy, Earth observation
and telecommunications.

4. The Future of European Human Spaceﬂight
4.1. 188 OPERATIONS
A key priority of European human spaceﬂight activities remains the
effective use of the 188 in the next 10 years in order to maximise the
return on European investment. In View of the planning of long-duration
human exploration missions it is imperative that the 188 is used for the
preparation of these new endeavours. The 188 is ideally suited for testing
hardware developments, and to perform long-term medical studies, related
to future exploration missions to Moon and Mars. These medical studies
on humans will be focused on the long-term effects of microgravity,
radiation biology, and the psychological effects of long duration ﬂight.
4.2. A EUROPEAN SCENARIO FOR THE EXPLORATION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Since the end of the 1990s, ESA has been preparing its next steps of
robotic and human space exploration in the frame of the Aurora pro-
gramme. It is the principal objective of the Aurora programme to perform
robotic missions to Moon and Mars for scientiﬁc purposes, and to prepare
for later human missions to both targets. The ultimate goal for Europe in
this context is to participate as a partner in a global, international space
exploration endeavour to allow European astronauts to reach Mars by
the end of the third decade of the 21st century. Based on a Call for

"
"25","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 209
Exploration Ideas in 2001, ESA internal and industrial studies, and the
recommendations of EPAC (Exploration Programme Advisory Commit-
tee), the preliminary European priorities and objectives of Aurora were
deﬁned. In the short term, Aurora features robotic missions While at the
same time preparing for future human exploration missions. These mis-
sions are considered necessary to acquire scientiﬁc and technical knowl-
edge, and especially to further the development of European robotic
exploration capabilities. The ﬁrst key missions of the Aurora programme
are the Mars Exobiology Mission (EXOMars) and the Mars Sample Return
Mission (MSR). The ExoMars mission Will characterise the Mars biological
environment, search for traces of past and present life, and identify pos-
sible hazards before landing other spacecraft or humans.

The Mars Sample Return mission is a mission of the highest scientiﬁc
interest, and is the ﬁrst robotic mission that is directly relevant to a human
mission to Mars. The goal of bringing back the ﬁrst sample of Martian
soil is a major technological Challenge. In the present concept, the MSR
mission Will consist of two composite spacecraft. The ﬁrst includes an
Orbiter and a Re-entry Capsule, and Will be placed in a Mars orbit waiting
for the Mars Ascent Vehicle (MAV) to bring the soil samples into orbit.
The second spacecraft, to be launched 2 years later, Will include a cruise
stage carrying the Descent Module (DM) and the MAV towards Mars.
The DM Will land on the Martian surface Where the samples Will be
collected and stored in the MAV, Which Will bring them to orbit. After
docking With the Orbiter the samples Will be transferred from the MAV to
the Return Capsule.

Based on the European heritage in human spaceﬂight, ESA is currently
also assessing its future priorities for the development of human spaceﬂight
capabilities required for the exploration of the Moon and Mars, including
habitation, transportation and robotics. In particular initial steps have been
taken to analyse potential cooperation With Russia for the development of a
human transportation capability.

5. Conclusion
Considering the relative youthfulness of European human spaceﬂight,
signiﬁcant technical and scientiﬁc progress has been achieved. The launch
of the European Columbus laboratory planned for 2006/7 Will pave the
way for the implementation of a signiﬁcant ISS utilisation programme
Which Will further advance technical and scientiﬁc progress. Future human
spaceﬂight activities, in particular related to the exploration of Moon and
Mars, Will increasingly be integrated With robotic exploration missions

"
"26","210 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT
following a strategy that builds on the complementary skills of humans
and robots in space.
References

Clancy, P. and Wilson, A. (eds.):, 2003. Eumpean Utilisatian Plan far the Internatianal Space

StaZiOn, ESA SP-1270, 278 pp.
Seibert, G., Fitton, B. and Battrick, B. (eds), 2001. A WOer Withaut Gravity, ESA SP-1251,

495 .
Wilsonff. (ed), 1999. Explaiting the InternaZiOnal Space StaZiOn, A M issian far Eumpe, ESA

BR-141, 55 pp.

Discussion

Mr. Rodney Buckland (Open University): Is it possible to do a convincing
“cost-beneﬁt” analysis of, say, the development of medical technology arising
from space technology?

Mr. Hufenbach: Within the framework of the European space effort, some
4 billion Euros/year have been pumped into the European economy for about
two decades. An important part of that amount is used for the development
of leading edge technology to support ESA’s space programmes. Spaceﬂight
developments require novel technical solutions for an extreme environment.
This has created new products in terms of materials, instruments and ser-
vices. Some of these advanced technology developments ﬁnd their way into
applications other than just the space applications originally intended.
However it often takes several years for a new space technology derived
product to be transferred into a marketable product or service on the ground.

The beneﬁts from space activities are often “spin-offs” such as medical
instruments, new materials useful for industrial production, and new pro-
cessing techniques. In the area of life and physical sciences, ESA, assisted by
industry, performed an “identiﬁcation study” between 1999 and 2001, which
included an estimate of the market potential of related spin-offs. The out-
come of this study revealed 14 different technical items, mainly in the area of
medical instruments derived from instruments developed for space life sci-
ence investigations, that were already on the market. In 2001 the estimated
value of these 14 spin-offs amounted to 60 million Euros, and in 2003 was 100
million Euros. Thus in 2003 the revenue associated with these spin-offs eX-
Ceeded the actual annual public funding spent by BSA in the ﬁeld of space life
and physical sciences. Speciﬁc examples in the medical care ﬁeld include:

"
"27","HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT: ACHIEVEMENTS, BENEFITS AND FUTURE 211

0 A “selftonometer” for routine monitoring of the ocular pressure in
glaucoma patients

0 A bone densitometer (“Osteospace”) based on ultrasound instead of
X-rays

0 “Video Oculograph” for the measurement of eye orientation and
corrective eye surgery for swivel eyed Children

0 A “Respired Gas Analyser” to determine cardiac output and lung
Characteristics and functioning; and

0 “Sterilite”, an ozone gas based disinfection system for biomedical
instruments

There are many more such spin-offs, details of Which can be found in the
following ESA publications on Space Technology Transfers: “Fitness,
Leisure and Lifestyle”, ESA BR-184(VI); “Medicine 1”, BSA BR-184 (VII);
“Medicine 11”, ESA BR-184 (IX); “Babyguard”, ESA BR-184(X); and “A
Thread from Space to your Body”, ESA,BR-l84 (XIV).

Professor Bernhard Foing (BSA): The president of India unveiled his Vi-
sion of exploration of the Moon “for all human kind” at Udaipur on 23
November 2004. Japan is also preparing a roadmap for space exploration.
How do you think that the international community can best harmonise its
human spaceﬂight objectives?

Mr. Hufenbach: In the political/social context, multi-national exploration
programmes Will help enhance international cooperation, and as a conse-
quence the world might become more peaceful. In the longer term, the
creation of a permanently manned outpost on the Moon may be seen as the
ﬁrst stage in the spread of human culture across the Solar System. A global
space exploration programme should be initiated, With Wide-ranging
international discussions to design and test appropriate new multi-cultural
governance and organisational structures for its management, development
and ﬁnancing.

Dr. Patrick Magee (Royal United Hospital, Bath): A comment: opportu-
nities for UK citizens to work in ESA are limited by the low level of UK
contributions to BSA, especially in human spaceﬂight. Michael Foale and
Piers Sellers had become US Citizen to become NASA astronauts. Thus UK
interests are not fostered by sitting on the sidelines.

Mr. Hufenbach: Since the UK has decided in the past not to participate in
ESA’s Columbus Programme, Which represents the European contribution
to the ISS, ESA has not invited British candidates to become members of the
European astronaut corps. However, British scientists do participate as
co-investigators in the research programmes associated With human space-
ﬂight.

Professor Steve Miller (UCL): You mentioned the inspirational effect of
the Apollo programme in terms of the increased numbers of young people

"
"28","212 BERNHARD HUFENBACH AND GUNTHER SEIBERT

taking up postgraduate studies in science in the late 1960s and 1970s. Your
suggestion was that Britain would beneﬁt from a similar increase in student
interest if the UK were involved in ESA’s human spaceﬂight programme, as
well as there being an increased general public interest in science. Countries
like France and Italy are already involved in human spaceﬂight programmes,
but I am not aware of a great difference between France and Italy, on the one
hand, and the UK, on the other, in terms of public interest in science. Like
the UK, France and Italy are also suffering from a relative decline in student
interest in the physical sciences. So my question is: if involvement in human
spaceﬂight is inspirational in the way you suggest, why does this effect not
show up in international surveys of public interest in science and in terms of
students enrolling for studies in the physical science studies? A suggestion is
that ESA might want to conduct a more focussed in-depth study of this
question to see whether or not this inspirational effect is actually present,
perhaps hidden beneath the raw statistics.

Mr. Hufenbach: It is a proven fact, based on statistical data, that the
Apollo Programme inspired younger generations of peoples across the world
to take greater interest in technology and natural sciences, a prerequisite for
ﬂourishing economies. However, there is a difference between the Apollo
Programme of the 1960s and 1970s, an achievement, which is recognised as
one of the most spectacular technical performances in the history of man-
kind, and the human spaceﬂight programmes in the 1980s and 1990s. The
1980/ 1990s manned spaceﬂight activities were not interplanetary missions,
but had the objective to eXploit the environment of Low Earth Orbit using
retrievable transportation vehicles, like the Space Shuttle and Soyuz, and
orbital laboratories like MIR, Spacelab and the ISS. Nevertheless, with re-
spect to the speciﬁc question of a presently existing difference of interest in
science in the UK and in France/Italy it might, as suggested, be useful to
perform a focused study based on statistical data, which might be available
through the EU.

The situation has now Changed dramatically. At the beginning of 2004,
President Bush announced a new Space Exploration Vision, starting with a
return to the Moon by 2020 in preparation for the human exploration of
Mars and other destinations in the Solar System. Mr. Bush intends to invite
the space-faring nations of the world to participate in this new space
exploration programme. Recently, the new NASA Administrator, Michael
Griﬂcin, has criticized the past space policy of NASA, and especially its failure
to continue with human space exploration after the Apollo Programme. He
regretted that a lot of exploration experience has been lost over the last three
decades, and conﬁrmed his commitment to the new Vision. It can certainly be
expected that the ﬁrst human landing on Mars will have a similar inspira-
tional effect as the Apollo Programme had in 1960s and 1970s.

"
