"","x"
"1","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
EXTRA-CURRICULAR SCIENCE LABS
FOR GIFTED STUDENTS
Dieter Hausamannl, DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen
German Aerospace Center (DLR), D-82234 Wessling, Germany
Abstract
In the past couple of years numerous extra-ourrioular science laboratories (‘sohool labs’) have
been established, their main obj eotive being to attract school students to science and
technology. The DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen, operated by Germany's national
research center for aeronautics and space, DLR, is a typical example for such a science lab.
Apart from hands-on experiments offered for students, one of its key activities is the
education of teachers.
In this paper the basic concept of an extra-ourrioular science lab is presented, as well as the
special concept of the DLR_Sohool_Lab and its strong ties to state-of—the-art—aerospace
research and technology. The lab’s great expertise from numerous high-level enrichment
proj ects for highly talented secondary school students is described. Furthermore, its teacher
education concept and capabilities With respect to gifted education is demonstrated. Finally,
results from internal and external evaluations are presented Which indicate the successful
operation of extra-ourrioular science labs.
Introduction
In Germany there is presently a lack of about 100,000 engineers and about 50,000 IT
specialists, the corresponding numbers for Europe are about a factor of ten higher. Attracting
talented young people to science and technology is, therefore, a societal task of utmost
priority (see e.g., of. Heller 2007 and 2008, Heller & Ziegler 2007).
The existing educational system cannot fulﬁll this task appropriately: In the ﬁelds of science
and technology regular curricula cannot provide sufﬁcient information and motivation.
Because of this lack of information at school, many secondary school students - even at the
end of school - are not able to decide about their ﬁJture study or professional goals. The
situation is even more difficult for gifted students because their talents often allow for a
greater number of different choices.
Due to the fact that gifted students often are underohallenged by regular school lessons, their
great potential is not used or stimulated appropriately. Gifted youth are not per se motivated
to make use of their talents, they rather loose interest and motivation by being educated at a
low intellectual level.
Especially for this group it is extremely helpful if they come into close contact With
demanding professional situations of engineers and scientists: They get the chance to
incorporate the role of a researcher in the frame of a science proj eot and cope With institutions
involved in research and development.
In order to attract young people to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and make them interested in the respective university disciplines, in the last decade
1 E-mail dieter.hausamann@dlr.de
Hausamann - Extra-Currioular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoo 13.1 of 12

"
"2","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
many extracurricular science labs have been established by research centers and universities
all over Europe, more than two hundred thereof in Germany (LeLa n.d.).

In a typical school lab students are enabled to perform high-teoh experiments autonomously
and in their own responsibility. The didactioal concept is based on a methodology called
‘Inquiry-Based Science Education’ (IBSE) Which has recently been recommended by the
Euopean Commission (2007), however, it had been developed ﬁve decades ago by Martin
Wagensohein (1962 and 1980).

In order to achieve a sustainable impact, the typical one-day-Visit to a school lab must
necessarily be complemented by the mathematics and science teachers. They have to
interconnect high-teoh experiments and research, on the one hand, and the standard
curriculum and school lessons on the other hand. This requires respective skill enhancement
and advanced teacher trainings in Which the link between extracurricular activities at the
school lab and the standard school curriculum is established.

Another aspect of high importance is the veriﬁcation of a sustainable impact of such extra-
curricular measures and offers, i.e. the students’ experimental Visits as well as the teacher
trainings have to by thoroughly evaluated.

In this paper, the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen is presented as a typical extra-
curricular science lab in the context of DLR’s research center Oberpfaffenhofen, including its
regular offers for secondary school classes. Second, the school lab’s methods of talent
development are described, including several practical examples of enrichment proj ects.
Third, the concept and practical experience of teacher trainings — especially With respect to
gifted education — are demonstrated. In the latter sections, feedbaoks of students and teachers,
respectively, are presented, as well as the hitherto existing results of evaluation studies.
The DLR_School_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen — an extra-curricular
science lab

The German Aerospace Center DLR

DLR(n.d.) is Germany's national research center for aeronautics and space. Its extensive
research and development work in aeronautics, space, transportation and energy is integrated
into national and international cooperative ventures. As Germany's Space Agency, the
German federal government has given DLR responsibility for the forward planning and
implementation of the German space programme as well as international representation of
Germany's interests.

Approximately 5,700 people work for DLR; the center has 29 institutes and facilities at 13
locations in Germany. The DLR site at Oberpfaffenhofen near Munich, employing about
1,500 people, is one of Germany’s largest research locations. The main activities of the ﬁve
institutes in Oberpfaffenhofen are devoted to space missions, climate research, development
of earth observation systems and technologies, the European spaoe-based navigation system
Galileo, and to robotics and meohatronios. These activities are complemented by two space
operation centers, research ﬂight operations and the German remote sensing data center.
The DLR_School_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen

Since a couple of years the German Aerospace Center DLR operates siX extra-ourrioular
science labs, one of Which is the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen (n.d.). This science lab
offers high-teoh experiments to secondary school students Which are based on the core
Hausamann - Extra-Currioular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoo p2 of 12

"
"3","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
research areas and technology fields of the DLR institutes in Oberpfaffenhofen and the
authentic research atmosphere of a large-scale research center (Hausamann et al. 2008). The
students experience the fascination of aerospace research and become acquainted With the
areas as well as With the working method of high-teehnology research. The DLR_Sch001_Lab
presently offers eleven experiments: Infrared, laser, and radar technology, environmental
spectroscopy, meterology, analysis of satellite-based earth observation data, satellite
navigation, robotics, Virtual mechanics, ﬂight-team simulation, and mobile rocket research.

In a typical one-day Visit to the DLR_School_Lab, each student can perform two of these
experiments corresponding to his or her personal scientific interest. Each experiment
comprises two hours of intense activites and experimentation in the respective technology
ﬁeld, therefore, by the end of the day, the student has gained insight into two research areas
and their respective working methodologies.

The experimenting students are supervised and supported by DLR scientists as well as
university students, however, in principle they are stimulated to work independently and self-
regulated to compile new knowledge and expertise about backgrounds, physical, technical
and geoseientiﬁcal interrelations, and applications of the respective science and technology.
They work in small groups of four to ﬁve students Which generates a stimulating working
atmosphere as well as it ties them together as a team.

The key success factor of this extra-eurricular science lab is the autonomous and responsible
handling of modern and, mostly, valuable state-of—the-art high-tech devices, Which are not
available at school. E.g. the students are allowed to operate a surface spectrometer, an infrared
camera, mobile laser and radar systems, or work With sophisticated simulation programs.

The standard Visit to the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen is, in general, complemented
and completed by a Visit to the German Space Operation Center (GSOC) and t0 the recently
opened Galileo Control Center, Which provides insight into the control of satellites, the re-
search activities on the international space station 188 as well as the operation of Europe’s
future satellite navigation system.

Since its opening in 2003 more than 7,500 students have experimented in the
DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen.

Assessment by students

Internal and external evaluations are necessary measures to investigate the sustainable effect
of extra-eurrieular science labs. The DLR_Sch001_Labs’ standard internal evaluation tools are
anonymous questionnaires and oral statements. At the end of a Visiting day both types of
feedback are requested from each participating student. According to several thousand ques-
tionnaires and statements more than two—thirds of the students would like to Visit the lab once
more. This result is conﬁrmed by an extended external evaluation performed by the Leibniz
Institute for Science Education at the University of Kiel, Germany (Pawek 2009). Another
questionnaire addressing students WhO left school in 2008 (and WhO had Visited the
DLR_Seh001_Labs in the past years) shows strong evidence that the study decisions of nu-
merous (up to 50%, depending on the individual school) former school students have strongly
been inﬂuenced by their DLR_Sch001_Lab experience.

Offers for gifted students

Acceleration and enrichment are proven measures to foster gifted students. For this purpose,
Renzulli and Reis (2002) have developed the so-called Sehoolwide Enrichment Model
(SEM), Which is especially appropriate to overcome the limits of school curricula and opens
Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc 13.3 of 12

"
"4","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
the door to the fascination of science and research beyond. This, however, requires the coop-
eration of schools With experienced research partners, Who are able to communicate the en-
thusiasm for their respective discipline.

One of the key obj eotives of the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen is the promotion of spe-
cially gifted young people (Hausamann 2005). The lab’s experiments, derived from current
research activities of the DLR institutes, are adaptable to the potential of, especially, highly
talented and motivated students because they don’t provide any limits With respect to deep-
ness and complexity. The same holds for the supervising scientists and students, Whose per-
sonal expertise exceeds even the highest school levels by far. In the past years the
DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen has developed, conducted and successfully completed
about 30 special proj ects and events for highly talented students. In principle, there are two
possibilities for such proj ects:

1. Regular Visits to the DLR_School_Lab:

The science content of school lab experiments can be used to extend the regular curriculum,
i.e. the standard content of school lessons. The scientiﬁc content as well as the range of activi-
ties of the respective DLR_Sohool_Lab experiment can be adapted to the special conditions
and requests of talented students,

0 On the one hand by “rejuvenation”: Gifted students might be able to perform complex
experiments at a much younger age than regular students: A typical example is the
meohatronios experiment ASURO (n.d.) Which comprises assembling and program-
ming a complete robot rover and Which is, therefore, only suitable for high school stu-
dents of age 16 and above. Numerous highly gifted students have successfully assem-
bled the robot at much lower age, down to age 12 (of. Hausamann 2005).

o On the other hand by “extension”: When performing an experiment students have the
chance to penetrate to very complex levels of the physical theories, they can develop
and perform new and sophisticated experimental techniques, or they can design com-
plex programs and analysis methods compared to the standard execution. These op-
tions have been utilized extensively by gifted students.

,Rejuvenation’ and ,extension’ are measures corresponding to the standard didactioal meth-
odologies of gifted education, namely acceleration and enrichment, respectively. The
DLR_Sohool_Lab has gained much of its respective experience from the special classes for
gifted students at the Maria-Theresia-Gymnasiums in Munich (n.d.). About 10 of these spe-
cial classes for gifted students have Visited the school lab in the past siX years.

Evaluation: Highly gifted students in the DLR_School_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen

The effect of the Visits to the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen on gifted students has been
investigated by a pilot study conducted by the University of Wurzburg (Stumpf et al. 2008).
In this study, the feedbacks and questionnaires of gifted students were compared to the re-
spective response of standard classes.

The result of the general assessments of the Visits is unambiguously positive for all students.
More than half of the students conﬁrm that their respective interest in natural sciences has
been enhanced by the Visit; nearly every second student intends to aim for a technical or soi-
entiﬁo profession.

Obviously, there are no significant gender differences in the feedbacks. This has been ﬁgured
out for many details such as personal interest, comprehension, introduction to and supervision
of the experiments.

Hausamann - Extra-Currioular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoo 13.4 of 12

"
"5","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
Nevertheless, there are signiﬁcant differences between regular and gifted student groups: E.g.
85% of the gifted, but only 66% of the regular students indicated their interest in another Visit
of the school lab. The ranking of the individual experiments is different for the two groups,
more difficult experiments ranking higher for gifted students. As an overall result, the feed-
back of the gifted participants is more positive than that of the regular classes.

However, one crucial question could not been investigated in this pilot study, namely the sus-
tainability of a Visit to the school lab. For this purpose a further — and much more extended —
study is presently being designed by the authors of the pilot study, in which the long-term
effects should be emphasized, as well as the comparison to control groups that did not have
the opportunity to Visit an extra-ourrioular science lab.

2. Type-3 enrichment projects:

Renzulli’s Sohoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM, Renzulli & Reis 2002) provides a practical
basis for school programs to identify and foster school students with exceptional abilities and
help young people develop their respective talents. Renzulli introduces three types of enrich-
ment activities of increasing complexity and demands:

0 Type I enrichment moves students beyond the regular curriculum to potentially excit-
ing new areas of interest.

0 Type II enrichment enables students to handle advanced and differentiated topics.

0 Type III enrichment is the most advanced stage; it “involves students who become in-
terested in pursuing a self—seleoted area and are willing to commit the time necessary
for advanced content acquisition and process training in which they assume the role of
a ﬁrst-hand inquirer’ (Renzulli & Reis 2002).

Enrichment activities provide opportunities for students to work in a self—direoted manner on
an applied subj eot, to develop authentic products, and to achieve an intended impact on a de-
ﬁned target group. These students take over the role of a researcher.

In the past couple of years several type III enrichment proj ects have been completed in coop-
eration of the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen and gifted student groups from different
locations in Germany.

The following two examples show the distinctiveness and complexity of type III enrichment
proj ects, how highly talented student teams can be occupied with highly interesting questions
in current research, and how they are guided from the status of active learners to that of active
researchers.

The GPS-Einstein proj ect

Satellite navigation is one of the rare technical applications which is strongly inﬂuenced by
both Einstein’s special and general theories of relativity: Satellite navigation requires a
change to the frequencies of atomic clocks on board of GPS satellites in order to synchronize
them with the clocks on the ground.

The intention of the GPS-Einstein proj eot (Hausamann & Sohmitz 2007) was to investigate
quantitatively how much adjustment the satellite clocks require. It was initiated by the
DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen, based on its expertise in the technical ﬁeld of satellite
navigation.

The overall duration of the proj eot was approximately half a year. It was carried out in the
Year of Physics 2005 by a 12th grade physics course at the CJD Christophorussohule Konig-
swinter in Germany. The gifted education concept of this school is characterized by a subdivi-
sion of the regular school year into three trimesters. By accelerating and compacting the our-
Hausamann - Extra-Currioular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoo 13.5 of 12

"
"6","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
rioulum, one of the trimesters is available for special enrichment proj ects. The 12th grade
physics course (11 students) of the 2004/5 school year was an ideal group to be stimulated for
the GPS-Einstein proj eot in the 3rd trimester:

In the first phase, the students were introduced to Einstein’s theory of relatiVity on the one
hand, and to satellite based navigation on the other hand in the frame of a type II enrichment
activity: Each of the students had to work on a specific sub-area, such as determination of the
speed of light, astronomical methods for navigation, principles of satellite navigation, error
analysis and correction, and economic and technological requirements for satellite navigation
systems. They subsequently produced corresponding reports and presented the results to the
class. These individual activities were supported by the teacher. Furthermore, the students
were introduced to the technology of GPS receivers.

The second phase of the proj eot was a three-day excursion to the DLR_Sohool_Lab Oberpfaf—
fenhofen. The program of this Visit was tailored to the expected requirements and abilities of a
group of exceptionally gifted students. One important didactioal feature was a continuous al-
ternation between self—regulated experimental activities and scientiﬁc lectures at university
level (i.e. much higher than the standard secondary school physics course level). The main
focus was an in-depth elaboration of knowledge with respect to satellite navigation science
and technology, time standards, atomic clocks and time measurement, and the consequences
of Einstein’s theories of relatiVity for navigation satellites. Finally there were several oppor-
tunities to discuss the respective subj eots among the members of the group, with the supervis-
ing students as well as with the navigation experts. This helped deﬁne the further steps of the
proj eot.

In the third and final phase of the proj eot four of the 11 students, after having returned home
from Oberpfaffenhofen, took responsibility for quantitatively investigating the problem, put-
ting everything together, and coming up with answers to the key questions: They derived the
frequency shift of the GPS satellite clocks and the consequences thereof. According to the
impression of all supervisors, these students represented the top group of the physics course.
These four students demonstrated their final results in the frame of a school festival, including
a detailed poster presentation and an experimental demonstration of GPS receivers on the
schoolyard. As a further highlight the group was invited to the Students” Congress in Munich
in December 2005 to present their ﬁnal results. This national congress at the end of the Ein-
stein Year of Physics 2005 was devoted to Albert Einstein’s life and research.

The proj ect geophysics — remote sensing from satellites

One of the most important methods to identify changes of the environment is called ,ohange
detection”: Satellite data acquired at different times are compared in order to quantitatively
analyze changes caused by natural or human impact, such as sealing of the soil surface by
settling activities, environmental damage, or natural catastrophes. At school this complex
method has so far only been applied in special geography courses at the top secondary school
classes.

The goal of the enrichment proj eot ‘geophysios — remote sensing from satellites’ was to inves-
tigate the changes of the participants” home environment by studying the properties of the
solar radiation spectrum and its inﬂuence on the geosystem and by analysing remote sensing
data from satellites (Hausamann et al. 2007).

Hausamann - Extra-Currioular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoo 13.6 of 12

"
"7","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
The proj eet was initiated eonj ointly by the Heetor-Seminar2 and the DLR_Sch001_Lab
Oberpfaffenhofen. In early 2006 the proj eet was ofﬁcially announced on the website of the
Hector-Seminar (n.d.). The focus groups were 9th and 10th grade students. Ten students from
ten different secondary schools applied for the proj eet.

The preparation phase was started with a one-day workshop in April 2006 in Heidelberg,
where the students were introduced to the scientiﬁc background, methodologies and tech-
nologies of satellite based remote sensing of the earth’s environment. Furthermore, hardware
and software details of the respective Sch001_Lab experiments were introduced. The proj eet
goals were discussed and agreed.

The second phase consisted of a Visit to the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen: In May
2006 the Heetor-Seminar students spent three days in Oberpfaffenhofen. All of them perfor-
med the experiments environmental spectroscopy and satellite data. Special attention was
given to the operation of DLR’s imaging hyperspectral ground spectrometer. Extended practi-
cal sessions were focused on the application of two different software programs to access,
process, and analyze satellite data. Further subj eets were a theoretical course 011 infrared mea-
surement technology and remote sensing, a guided tour to DLR’s Crisis Intervention Center
and the robot-operated data archive. The proj ect tasks were defined in detail, the most impor-
tant being the analysis of changes, based on a comparison of satellite images from 1989 and

1 999.

The third proj eet phase was initiated two weeks after the Visit to Oberpfaffenhofen. The
DLR_Sch001_Lab supervising team went to Heidelberg for a measurement campaign involv-
ing all instruments (spectrometers and infrared devices). Further investigations with these
instruments provided the students with deeper insights and helped them answer several open
questions. Based on information and results from the measurement campaign the students
performed the ﬁnal task of the proj eet: they classified satellite images and analyzed changes
to their respective home environment and, ﬁnally, produced reports 011 the results.

End of September 2006 the students presented the Geophysics proj eet at the 2006 Hector-
Seminar Proj ect Workshop in Mannheim. Teachers, students and invited guests were in-
formed about the results in oral presentations and posters.

The exceptional work of this group was recently honored with the DLR_Sehool_Lab Price
2008. This price is awarded every year by the Society of Friends of DLR, based on a proposal
of DLR’s Executive Board.

2 The Heetor-Seminar (e.f. Heller 2008a) is a program to foster highly gifted secondary school students by pro-
viding enrichment activities in the areas of mathematics, informatics, natural sciences and teehnies. It is ﬁnanced
and supported by the Hector Foundation. The Heetor-Seminar supervises especially gifted secondary school
students on a long-term basis throughout their school career. The seminar program supplements the regular
school activities, from the 6th grade to the end of secondary school at the 13th grade. The proj ects are of inter-
disciplinary Character, the main Obj eetive aiming to facilitate a holistic development of personality, the activation
and evolvement of cognitive, methodical, personal, and social potentials, as well as the development of corre-
sponding competencies and capabilities. Each seminar course comprises 60 students who are Chosen in a two-
stage selection process from all 7,500 6th grade students of the secondary schools in the region of north-western
Baden-Wuerttemberg. The ﬁrst stage selection is a screening process, whereas the secondary selection is based
on the Munich High Ability Test Battery developed by Heller & Perleth (2005). The cognitive, creative, and
social capabilities of the selected students are far beyond the secondary school average. The seminars are located
in the three cities of Heidelberg, Mannheim, and Karlsruhe; they are headed by two teachers each, and are con-
dueted two afternoon hours per week. Presently some 400 students in eight courses participate in the Hector-
Seminar.

Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc 13.7 of 12

"
"8","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
Students assessment of the type III enrichment projects
The feedback of each individual group involved in the DLR_Sch001_Lab’s type III enrich-
ment proj ects was extremely positive — even if there were distinct points of criticism and sub-
stantial recommendations for improvements. The following assessment is quite typical for all
of the proj ects:
On the occasion of a Visit to the Christophorusschule Kbnigswinter in May 2006 (i.e. half a
year after termination of the GPS-Einstein proj eet) there was an opportunity to talk to the four
students of the GPS-Einstein proj ect and their supervising teacher. The students reported that
it was at the end of the proj eet that they took over the initiative to ﬁnalize the proj eet, i.e. pro-
duce the ﬁnal report and present the results. This ﬁnal work was quite exhausting, but left a
deep and very positive impression. According to the students’ conclusion, the proj eet had
strongly inﬂuenced the study decisions of all four of them — physics, chemistry, information
technology, and mechanical engineering.
Teacher Education at the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen
The DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen offers advanced training courses for teachers in or-
der to prepare them for the Visits of their classes. The main obj ective 0f the teacher education
is to help them integrate the extra-eurricular activities into their standard curricula and,
thereby, generate an application oriented concept for classroom education. The school lab
offers special courses for teacher groups from individual schools, for regional teacher groups
(from different schools), and for advanced trainings 0f Bavarian seminar teachers, i.e. the in-
structors of future teachers.
The key elements of the teacher training are self—contained experiments, where the teachers
take over the role of their students and experience the same feeling of success when complet-
ing an experiment. The experimental work is complemented by didactical as well as scientiﬁc
background information about the respective experiments and research areas.
In the past ﬁve years about 1,000 teachers have attended advanced teacher trainings by the
DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen. The general feedback of teachers is extremely positive,
especially with respect to self dependent accomplishment of high-tech experiments, technical
advancement, and stimulations for practical classroom teaching. Many of them have obvi-
ously been stimulated to Visit the DLR_Sehool_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen with their classes.
A typical example is a one-day external regional advanced teacher training on robotics which
took place in Regensburg, Bavaria, in October 2007. The 19 participants built and pro-
grammed, altogether, siX ASURO (n.d.) robots. The feedback presented in the following table
1 was ofﬁcially requested by the organizing school administration.
w “3
. . 5 000 on
Assessment by the part1c1pants f) i“ '8 .S
o a :1
0
L53 § (3 63 £3
Fulﬁllment of expectations -----
Practical usability of results ﬂ“-
Quality of presentation -----
General conditions of course 14 ----
Table 1: Feedback 0f the participants of the advanced teacher course on robotics
Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc p.8 0f 12

"
"9","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
Education of teachers of the gifted
Teachers play a key role in gifted education; their characteristics and necessary competencies
have long ago been summarized by Seeley (1985): Especially in type III enrichments the
teacher’s role changes from that of an educational instructor to that of an initiator, mentor,
supervisor, coach, consultant, and assessor of achievements.
Most important is to support the independence, motivation, and creativity of gifted students
(e.f. Cropley & Urban 2002). Pedagogical concepts such as open learning (Peschel 2002) or
self—regulated learning (Fischer 2004) are ideally suited for type III enrichment proj ects.
The teacher education concept developed at the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen
(Hausamann 2008 and 2008a), interconnecting science labs and the school curriculum, in-
cluding self—experimentation, science background, and didactical context utilizes all of the
methodologies described above and is, therefore, especially suitable for teachers of gifted
learners. In addition,

0 the scientiﬁc background of individual experiments is extended to possible problems

and questions of highly interested and talented students,
0 possible combinations of different experiments and technologies are addressed,
0 and the didactieal background to accelerate experiments, i.e. to make them feasible
and interesting for younger students, is presented.

A one-day workshop of a group of Heetor-Seminar supervisors at the DLR_Sch001_Lab
Oberpfaffenhofen in December 2004 is a typical example for such an advanced gifted educa-
tion teacher course. The feedback was quite enthusiastical, correspondingly the overall mark
for this workshop was “excellent” by six of the seven participants. This workshop was the
nucleus of, so far, two successfully completed type III enrichment proj ects: Geophysics in
2006 (see above) and Satellite Navigation in 2008.
The DLR_Sch001_Lab’s extracurricular gifted education concept is also integrated in the so-
ealled ECHA Diploma teacher education courses of the International Center for Giftedness at
the University of Mﬁnster, Germany (ICBF, n.d.). Since 2007 the potential of extracurricular
science labs — such as the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen — in gifted education is pre-
sented as part of the pratical education block, the main focus being the conception of type III
enrichment proj ects and stimulating recommendations and proposals. Additionally, the
DLR_Sch001_Lab has been appointed an official location which can be Visited for observa-
tion of gifted student courses; two of such observations are mandatory for each ECHA Di-
ploma applicant.
Summary and future prospects
A11 enrichment concept for gifted students has been developed and successfully realized in
numerous proj ects at the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen. The same holds for the gifted
education teacher training concept, which comprises especially the scientiﬁc and didactical
basics for type III enrichment proj ects at pre-university school level.
The success of these activities is confirmed by evaluations. However, with respect to the long-
term impact and sustainability further studies are required.
The enrichment proj ects have practically demonstrated how school students, by working with
scientiﬁc subj eets far above school level, transform from learners to researchers. The trans-
formation of concepts such as ‘self—regulated learning” to a corresponding concept of ‘self—
regulated research” would certainly help to describe the crossover of gifted young people from
school to university. In this transformation process, the spatial, social, and formal boundaries
of the classroom situation is dissolved, problems are no longer bound to the known, thus re-
Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc p9 of 12

"
"10","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
quiring new processes of cognition. The theoretical description of the transition from a gifted
learner to a gifted researcher should become an issue for giftedness research.
Acknowledgement

The support of this work by the German Aerospace Center DLR is gratefully acknowledged.

Sincere thanks are given t0 to Prof. Kurt Heller, Prof. Franz Ménks, and t0 the University of

Mﬁnster’s International Center of Giftedness for their key inputs and basic concepts of gifted-

ness. The success of the DLR_Sch001_Lab’s enrichment projects is based on the strong sup-

port by Dr. Winfried Schmitz, Georg Wilke, Matthias Taulien, and Thomas Heins. This work
would not have been possible Without the essential contributions of the DLR_Sch001_Lab
team Oberpfaffenhofen.

References

ASURO (n.d.). Retrieved J anuary 6, 2009 from http_://de.wikip_edia.org/Wiki/ASURO

Cropley, A.J. & Urban, K.K. (2002). Programs and strategies for nurturing creativity. In K.A.
Heller, F.J. Ménks, R.J. Stemberg & R.F. Subotnik (Eds), International handbook ofngt-
edness and talent (2nd ed., revised reprint, pp. 485-498). Oxford: Pergamon.

DLR (n.d.). Deutsches Zentrum fﬁr Luft und Raumfahrt — German Aerospace Center. Re-
trieved J anuary 15, 2009 from htt1:_>://WWW.dlr.de/en/desktolgdefault.asp_X.

DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen (n.d.). Retrieved J anuary 6, 2009 from
htt1:_)://WWW.dlr.de/schoollab/en/desktopdefault.asng/tabid-173 8/.

European Commission (2007). Science Education NOW: A Renewed Pedagogy for the Future
of Europe. EUR22845. Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European
Communities. 22 pages. ISBN 978-92-79-05659-8.

Fischer, Ch. (2004). Selbstreguliertes Lemen in der Begabtenférderung. 111 Ch. Fischer, F.J.
M(‘jnks & E. Grindel (Hrsg), Curriculum und Didaktik der Begabtenférderung (pp. 83-95).
Mﬁnster: LIT.

Hausamann, D. (2005). High-Teeh Experimente im DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen -
Hochbegabte brauchen besondere Herausforderungen. In: Osterreiehisches Zentrum fﬁr
Begabtenférderung und Begabungsforschung (Ed.), Die Forseher/innen V011 morgen: Kon-
gressbericht des 4. Intemationalen Begabtenkongresses in Salzburg (pp. 211- 218). ISBN
3-7065-4149-1, Innsbruck, Wien, Bozen: StudienVerlag.

Hausamann, D., Wilke, G., Taulien, M., Grixa, I. & Loeherer, M. (2007). Geophysics and
Satellite Remote Sensing — A11 Enrichment Project of the Hector Seminar. World Council
for Gifted and Talented Children. 17th Biennial World Conference. Warwick, UK, August
5 — 10.

Hausamann, D.; Schmitz, W. (2007). Enrichment at the Doorstep of University - The Einstein
GPS Project. In: Tirri, Kirsi; Ubani, Martin [Eds]: Policies and programs in gifted educa-
tion, Studia Paedagogica, 34, Yliopistopaino (pp. 37 — 46). ISBN 978-952-10-3854-9,
ISSN 1236-2867.

Hausamann, D. (2008). STEM Teacher Education: Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted
Learners. 11th Conference of the European Council for High Ability. Prague, Czech Re-
public. Sep 17 — 20.

Hausamann, D. (2008a). Extracurriculare Lehrerbildung: AuBersehulische Lernorte fﬁr die
Begabtenférderung. BEGABT — BEGABEND — VERAUSGABT? Begabte(n)f6rderer im

Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc p.10 0f 12

"
"11","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
Liehte Vielfeiltiger Herausforderungen. In: 6. Int. Kongress zu Fragen der Hochbegabten-
férderung. Salzburg, Austria. NOV. 6 — 8.

Hausamann, D., Sehﬁttler, T., Haigermoser, D. & Kéistner, B. (2008). The DLR_Sch001_Lab
Oberpfaffenhofen - Attracting Young People to Science and Engineering. Bridging the
Gap between Research and Science Education. Int. Conference. Vienna, Austria. March 12
— 14.

Hector-Seminar (n.d.). Retrieved J anuary 07, 2009 from htt ://WWW.hect0r-seminar.de/.

Heller, K.A. & Perleth, Ch. (2005). Mﬁnchner Hochbegabungs-Testbatterie (MHBT) [Munich
High Ability Test Battery]. Gettingen: Hogrefe (Belz Test).

Heller, K.A. (2007). Scientific ability and creativity. High Ability Studies, 18, 209-234.

Heller, K.A. & Ziegler, A., eds. (2007). Begabt sein in Deutschland. Talentférderung — Exper-
tiseentwicklung — Leistungsexzellenz, Band 1. Mﬁnster: LIT-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8258-
0766-5.

Heller, K.A. (2008). Von der Aktivierung der Begabungsreserven zur Hochbegabtenférde-
rung. Talentférderung — Expertiseentwicklung — Leistungsexzellenz, Band 2. Mﬁnster:
LIT-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8258-1013-9.

Heller, K.A. (2008a). Das Hector-Seminar zur Ferderung MINT-talentierter Gymnasiasten
auf dem Priifstand. Beitrag zur Jubiléiums—Festsehrift ,,10 Jahre LVH Baden-
Wﬁrttemberg“.

ICBF (n.d.). International Center for Giftedness, University of Mﬁnster, Germany. Retrieved
J anuary 6, 2009 from htt1:_)://WWW.icbf.de/

LeLa (n.d.). Lernort Labor — Center for Consulting and Quality Development, University of
Kiel, Germany. Retrieved J anuary 11, 2009 from htt1:_)://WWW.lern0rt-
1ab0r.de/en/index.1:_)h1:_).

Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium in Munich (n.d.). Retrieved J anuary 06, 2009 from
htt1:_>://WWW.mtg.musin.de/?cat=1&id=50

Pawek, C. (2009). PhD. Personal communication. University of Kiel, Germany.

Peschel, F. (2002). Offener Unterrieht — Idee, Realitéit, Perspektive und ein praxiserprobtes
Konzept zur Diskussion. Teil 1: Allgemeindidaktische Uberlegungen. Teil II: Faehdidakti-
sehe Uberlegungen. Baltmannsweiler: Schneider Verlag Hohengehren.

Renzulli, J .S. & Reis, S.M. (2002). The Sehoolwide Enrichment Model. In K.A. Heller, F.J.
Ménks, R.J. Stemberg & R.F. Subotnik (Eds), International handbook of giftedness and
talent (2nd ed., reV. reprint, pp. 367-3 82). Amsterdam: Elsevier / Oxford: Pergamon.

Seeley K. (1985). Facilitators for gifted learners. In J . Feldhusen (Ed), Toward excellence in
gifted education (pp. 105-133). Denver: Love Publishing Company.

Stumpf, E., Neudecker, E. & Schneider, W. (2008). Teilnehmer-Feedbaek zum Sch001_Lab
Oberpfaffenhofen — eine Pilotstudie zu auBerschulischen Enrichmentkursen fﬁr Gymnasi-
asten. Wﬁrzburg, Germany.

Wagenschein, M. (1962). Die péidagogische Dimension der Physik. Grundthemen der péida-
gogischen Praxis. G. Westermann, Braunschweig.

Wagensehein, M. (1980). Naturphéinomene sehen und verstehen. Genetische Lehrgéinge.
Hrsg. V. H.C. Berg. E. Klett, Stuttgart.

Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Studentsdoc p.11 0f 12

"
"12","Proceedings of the WCGT 18th Biennial World Conference, Vancouver, August 3 - 7, 2009
Author Information

The author (Ph.D. in Physics) has long-term experience in science & technology. He is a pro-
fessional teacher (physics and mathematics) and has received the ECHA Diploma as a Spe-
cialist for Gifted Education. Presently he is Head of the DLR_Sch001_Lab Oberpfaffenhofen
at the German Aerospace Center DLR and contributes to the ECHA education of teachers for
the gifted at the University of Mﬁnster, Germany.

Hausamann - Extra-Currieular Science Labs for Gifted Students.doc p. 12 0f 12

"
