"","x"
"1","SHORT COMMUNICATION
O O O
O
The ISS Flight of Rlchard Garrlott. a Template for
Medicine and Science Investigation on Future
Spaceflight Participant Missions
RICHARD T. JENNINGS, OWEN K. GARRIOTT,
VALERY V. BOGOMOLOV, VLADIMIR I. POCHUEV,
VALERY V. MORGUN, AND RICHARD A. GARRIOTT
JENNINGS RT, GARRIOTT 0K, BOGOOMOLOV YV, POCHUEOV V1, access to space was limited to the private sector, he
MORGUN VV’ GARFIOTT RA: 1713.185 ﬂight.” Rwhmd Gum“? ”1 worked to promote commercial spaceﬂight and had clear
template for medicine and saence investigation on future spaceflight 1 h. d . h. . . . 1 d. 1
participant missions. Aviat Space Environ Med 2010; 81:133—5. goa 5 t9 ac leve Utlng .18 m1§510nl Inc u mg persona I
Background: A total of eight commercial spaceflight participants have educational, and SClentlfIC pro]ects.
launched to the International Space Station (ISS) on Soyuz vehicles. Spaceﬂight participants do not have career medical
5359C! 0“ an Older mean agetompareqm career astronaUts .an 3“ certification constraints and have often been comfort-
mcreased prevalence of medical conditions, spaceflight partICIpants b1 1 . h . d. 1 . f h d f
have provided the opportunity to learn about the effect of space travel on a e re eaSng t €11“ the lca Stones 01‘ t e gOO 0 career
crewmembers with medical problems. The 12-d Soyuz TMA-13/12 ISS aStI‘ODaUtS aDd prlvate aStI‘ODaUtS that fOHOW. Thls
flight of spaceflight participant Richard Garriott included medical factors knowledge may make spaceﬂight safer and more pro-
that required preflight intervention, risk mitigation strategies, and pro- ductive for all astronauts and also widen ﬂight opportu-
VIded the opportunity for medical study on—orblt. Equally Important, Mr. 't' f th °th d. 1 d f' . . Th. th
Garriott conducted extensive medical, scientific, and educational pay- In les Oor ose W1 me 1(ia .e 1C1ehCIES. 15 was e
load operations during the flight. These included 7 medical experiments ease Wlth Rlehard Garrlett S ﬂlght SlnCe he had seVel‘a1
and a total of 15 scientific projects such as protein crystal growth, Earth medical conditions that created ﬂight certiﬁcation dilem-
observations/photography, educational projects with schools, and ama- mas and even required prophylactic surgery.
teur radio. The medical studies included the effect of microgravity on S ﬂ' ht t. . t h 1 bit
immune function, sleep, bone loss, corneal refractive surgery, low back pace 18 Opal“ 1c1pan S ave ess crew reSpOHSI 1 1 y
pain, motion perception, and intraocular pressure. Conclusion: The for the Operatlon aDd CODdUCt 0f the SOYUZ aDd ISS aDd
overall mission success resulted from non-bureaucratic agility in mission this provides critical time for conducting scientific in-
planning, cooperation with investigators from NASA, ISS, International quiry. Richard participated in 7 medical experiments a
Partners, and the Korean Aerospace Research Institute, in-flight support t . t 1 th t d A t R d. th ISIS
and leadership from a team with spaceflight and Capcom experience, pro en} crys a grow S u y’ ma eur a 10 on e ’
and overall mission support from the ISS program. This article focuses on Educatlonal OUtteaCh through the Challenger Centers
science opportunities that suborbital and orbital spaceflight participant and British National Space Center, Earth digital photog-
flights offer and suggests that the science program on Richard Garriott’s raphy and 50 personal Video blogs. This paper and the
flight be considered a model for future orbital and suborbital missions. I . . .
. . . . companion clinical case summary (3) document the
The medical Challenges are presented In a companion article. . . .
Keywords: spaceflight, spaceflight participant, private astronaut. medlcal SClence StUdleS he completed for NASA! the Eu""
ropean Space Agency (BSA), and the Korean Aerospace
— Research Institute (KARI) and demonstrate the science
COMMERCIAL SPACEFLIGHT has ma d e a c c ess to l2£1)r.1dlmed1cfal.l ioss1b1i1t1es for future orbital and subor-
space available for individuals who are often older, 1ta space 1g tpart1c1pants.
have a higher prevalence of medical conditions, and are . .
. . . Clzmcal Issues
free to select payloads that fit their interest. The space
medicine community has used this opportunity to gain Mr. Garriott knew from an early age that defective
microgravity experience in individuals with medical Vision precluded an astronaut career. He also learned
conditions that are not allowed in career astronauts (4). that he had a single cross-fused ectopic kidney. Since he
Hopefully, this experience will increase the ability to participated in adventure travel to Antarctica, rafting on
understand and treat preexisting illnesses and those
that develop during ﬂight. Richard Garriott’s Soyuz —
TMA 13/ 12 ﬂight to the International Space Station (ISS) From UTMB/ OHOUStOHI TX; . .
. 1e Of hOW me dical knowle d e can be leane d Thls manuscrlpt was recelved for rev1ew 1n August 2009. It was
IS an examp O O O g g O accepted for publication in November 2009.
from Spaceﬂlght Part1C1pantS- He had seVeral medlcal Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Richard T. Jennings,
conditions that precluded selection as a career astronaut. MD, MS, UTMB, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555-1110;
- I - rjenning@utmb.edu.
Mr. GarrlOtt S father’ Gwen .GarrlOtt’ was a Skylab and Reprint & Copyright © by the Aerospace Medical Association,
Shuttle astronaut, and he (Richard) knew as a teen that Alexandria, VA.
he could not medically qualify as an astronaut. Since his DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.2650.2010
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 2 - February 2010 133

"
"2","SPACEFLIGHT PARTICIPANT—JENNINGS ET AL.
the Amazon, skydiving, hang gliding, and Smeel‘Sible Sleep-Wake Actigraphy and Light Exposure During Spaceﬂight
diving to the depths Of the ocean it was pru d ent to have (NASA—Charles Czeisler PI). This study used actigraphy, light
. ’ detection, and sleep logs to collect data for space-related sleep
phOtorefraCtlve kerateCtomy surgery (PRK) for the de' disturbances and the effects of countermeasures such as hyp-
fective Visual acuit —also dis ualif in at the time. The notics. Data were collected reﬂi ht, in ﬂi ht, and ostﬂi ht.
Y q Y 8 P g g p g
contact lenses Recentl corneal refractive 8111‘ er b Clarence Sams PI). This study determined how immune func-
' y’ . g y y tion is altered during spaceﬂight. It included preﬂight, in-ﬂight,
PRK 01‘ LASIK W35 apPTOVed for Spaceﬂlght, bUt there and postﬂight blood, urine, and salivary collections for the
had been no postoperative experience in space (1) Mr, detection of stress-related changes and assessment of Viral
- ' - reactivation.
Gadl‘l‘lllott mlras the fdlrSt human to ﬂy 1n SPEC: afFerﬂPliK Effect of Microgravity on the Cornea of a Refractive Surgery Subject
an e vo.unteere t0 part1c1pate m a pre 16% t, m' 16% t, (NASA—Robert Gibson and Thomas Mader Pls). The investiga-
and postﬂlght NASA ophthalmologlcal study. Those re- tors compared preﬂight, in-ﬂight, and postﬂight Visual acuity and
sults should be reported soon by the investigators. conducted ophthalmologic investigations of corneal health.
Durin his S a C eﬂi ht artici ant m e di C a1 1‘ e S C 1‘ e en Vestibular Adaptation to G-level Transitions: Motion Perception
g P g p, P P , ’ (ESA—Eric Groen PI). This study examined the mechanisms of
he was found to have a glant SchaPSUIaI‘ hepatlc he"" vestibular adaptation to spaceﬂight and G-level transitions to val-
mangioma that required surgical resection. He under- idate ground-based centrifuge paradigms that simulate space
StOOd the significance Of the data from his various motion sickness on Earth. The study compared sensations from
. . . . . . preﬂight and postﬂight centrifuge exposure to head motions in
medlcal conditlons and his responses to training and S
. , pace.
ﬂlght, aDd he allowed hIS Cases to be presented at the Early Detection of Osteoporosis in Space (ESA—Christian Alexandre
2009 Aerospace Medical Association scientific meeting. ED-hThiS stgdy coanpared extremiiy quantifield CTS Pre' and Post-
_ - - ig tin or er to etect micro-arc itectura a terations.
The Case summary Of the “0.55 fused eCtgplc kldney and Low Back Pain (ESA—Enrico Ceglia PI). This study used preﬂight,
hepatlc hemagioma fOHOWS In a companion artlde (3) It in-ﬂight, and postﬂight questionnaires to characterize low back
is the prevalence of medical anomalies, openness to help pain in microgravity.
others and a desire to advance opportunities in space Intraocular Pressure Measurement (KARI). This study used hard-
th ti I mm n1 f n d in ﬂi ht rti 1 nt ware to detect intraocular pressure changes obtained through
a 5 co 0 y ou space g pa c pa 5. the eyelid.
Sczence Program Conclusion
Mr. Garrlott part1c1pated 1n 15 selence expel‘lments Human research and medical data obtained during
during his 10 d on the 155. These included the seven . . .
. . . . spaceﬂight has primarily come from career astronauts
medlcal experiments llsted below. Other studles . . . . . .
. . . . and 11m1ted numbers of sc1entlst-1nvest1gators.Analogue
included snapplng 2600 digital Earth photographs, . . .
. . . . enVironments such as alrcraft zero-g ﬂights, bed rest
some of which Wlll be compared to Similar photos of . . . . . . .
. . . fac1lit1es, centrifuges, and neutral buoyancy fac111t1es
the same terrain his father took on Skylab 3 in 1973.
Th h t . .11 d t h th t have been helpful. However, the access of humans to
e p .0 O comparisons W1. ocumen C anges a are self—funded orbital missions and the upcoming ﬂood of
occurring on the Earth. U51ng a new software package . . .
. . . suborbltal mlssmns open new avenues of research, and
(W1nd0ws on Earth), he obta1ned lmages of all the . . . . .
. . . . . access to longer periods of m1crograv1ty is g01ng to rap-
desued targets that came w1th1n his Visual range . . . . .
. 1dly 1ncrease. The seven spaceﬂlght part1c1pants to ﬂy
and could have accommodated more. He also coordi- . . . .
. . on eight Soyuz ﬂights to the 155 have shown Willingness
nated and prepared With his father and the company t t' . t . h d b d 1 k f
ExtremoZ me an ex erimental acka e of about 1000 0 par 1c1pa e in researc. an ’ ase on a ac . 0 career
f 3t] . 1p h' h th p d .g . h tl con51derations and altruism, have allowed them medlcal
rogen P101?“ gang: es W lct 1 awe 1m gilgth ezsnesls data to be used to advance space medicine. One can pre-
an Cf}? ? ize ' 01?“;ch a Zmayd eat 1:31 e eve _ dict that this trend will continue and the space medicine
opmen 0 new me .1ca lons an pro uc 5' e Wis very community must be ready to optimize the opportunity.
interested 1n educational efforts and by communlcation . . I . . .
, Rlchard Garrlott 5 ﬂight was unique Slnce he planned
through Amateur Radlo on the 155, he made hundreds . . . . . . .
f t t 'th h 1 Ch ll C t B . t' h for thls m1551on much of his life, had a551stance from his
0 CPD ac S W1 SC 00 S’ a enger en ers, r1 ls astronaut father, and had science contacts and payload
Natlonal Space Center contacts, and HAM operators t' t f th ﬂ. ht . f t t
ldwide (2) Usin Slow Scan TV he was able to opera 1ons suppon rom e space 1g . 1n ras ruc ure.
:yor 1. k . '. lgt d h t h f ld 'd On-orblt communicatlon With Mr. Garrlott was 11m1ted
9W? 1n. missmn-re a e p O ograp S or wor W1 e to one or occasionally two 10-15 min passes each day,
distrlbution. . . . . . .
and his product1v1ty was max1mized by advanced mls-
M d' I St 61' sion planning, the use of checklists, efficient air to
e 1C“ u 165 ground radio through his Capcom father, and timely ra-
From a medical science standpoint, Mr. Garriott diograms from the payload support team. His ﬂight,
worked with investigators from ESA, KARI, and NASA procedures, and the resulting accomplishments can
to complete seven separate investigations. Mr. Garriott serve as a model for future science programs and also
participated primarily in established studies, but inves- stimulate immediate planning by the space science
tigators obtained an additional subject ”N” during his community and the Federal Aviation Administration
ﬂight. The studies involved preﬂight, in-ﬂight, and post- for the optimum use of the microgravity available dur-
ﬂight data collection, and the results will be reported by ing suborbital ﬂights. While aircraft parabolas provide
the investigation teams. 20—25 s of microgravity, suborbital ﬂights provide
134 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 2 - February 2010

"
"3","SPACEFLIGHT PARTICIPANT—JENNINGS ET AL.
approximately 4 min of uninterrupted microgravity. Authors Ltnd aﬁliations: Richard T. Jennings, M.D., MS., University Of
Many scientists can benefit from the additional periods TEXF‘S M.Edlcal Brand"" Galvesmr.” TX; Gwen K‘ GamOtt' PhD"" M.S.,
, , , , Unlver51ty of Alabama, Huntsvﬂle, AL; Valery V. Bogomolov, M.D.,
Of welghtlessness and havmg pI‘OJEECtS ready for thlS Institute for Biomedical Problems,Moscow,Russia;Valdimir I. Pochuev,
large group Of spaceﬂight participants will provide M.D., Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, Russia; Valery V.
gre at dividends. $053011, 1\C/1[.I]é)i.,hRocsichrgos (1:1:sgian cmifral ’[SpaceﬁgencyeAMoscow
Finally, Mr. Garriott’s willingness to share his medical ussm’an C ar ‘ amo ’ pace ven ures’ lema’ ‘
data with the community has been extremely important,
and s ace medicine and human 5 ace ex loration will REFERENCES
P . . P . . . P 1. Bogomolov VV, Castrucci F, Comtois JM, Damann V, Davis JR,
beneﬁt dramatlcally- It 15 the reSP0n51b111ty 0f the Space Duncan JM, et al. International Space Station medical standards
medicine community to assist future spaceﬂight partici- and. certification for spaceﬂight participants. Aviat Space
pants and maximize the benefit of their scientific and Etwlmn MEd 2097? 78‘1162_9' , ,
d. 1 t. . t. 2. Garrlott OK, Garrlott RA. Two generatlons of Hams 1n space.
me 1C3 Pal“ 10133 1011- AMSAT]ourna12009;32(2):23—4.
3. Jennings RT, Garriott OK, Bogomolov VV, Pochuev VI, Morgun
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS VV, Garriott RA. Giant hepatic hemangioma and cross-fused
Special thanks to Richard Garriott for releasing his medical data. ectopic kidney in a spaceﬂight participant. Aviat Space Environ
Also thanks to Space Adventures, the Institute for Biomedical Med 2010; 812136—40.
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, the Gagarin Cosmonaut 4. Jennings RT, Murphy DM, Ware DL, Aunon SM, Moon RE,
Training Center, Roscosmos, the European Space Agency, the Korean Bogomolov VV, et a1. Medical qualification of a commercial
Aerospace Research Institute, and the National Aeronautics and Space spaceﬂight participant: not your average astronaut. Aviat Space
Administration. Environ Med 2006; 77:475—84.
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 2 - February 2010 135

"
