"","x"
"1","SHORT COMMUNICATION
Clinical Risk Management Approach for
Long-Duration Space Missions
GARY W. GRAY, ASHOT E. SARGSYAN, AND JEFFREY R. DAVIS

GRAY GW, SARGSYAN AE, DAVIS'JR; Clinicql TiSk manag'fment “P- aration of very long duration missions to the Moon,
127633.01; 11? 3:213:33"" duration Space """"5510“ AVlat Space Envuon Med Mars, and other destinations (2,3). ISS policies are stipu-

lntroduction: In the process of crewmember evaluation and certifica- lated 1n the ISS Intergovernmental Agreement and the
tion for long-duration orbital missions, the International Space Station Memoranda Of Understanding generated and Slgned

(ISS) Multilateral Space Medicine Board (MSMB) encounters a surpris- by medical representatives from all ISS Partner agencies,

ingly wide spectrum of Clinical problems. Some of these conditions are includin the United States National Aeronautics and

identified within the ISS Medical Standards as requiring special consid- S Ag . . . NASA h C d. S

eration, or as falling outside the consensus Medical Standards pro- pace mlnlstratlon ( )I t e ana lan pace

mulgated for the ISS program. Methods: To assess the suitability for Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (BSA), the
long-duration missions 0n ISS for individuals With medical problems that Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), and the
fall outside of standards er are etherwise of significant cohcern, the Russian Federal Space Agency (FSA). The Intergovern-

MSMB has developed a risk matrix approach to assess the risks to the t 1 A t d M d f U d t d.

individual, the mission, and the program. The goal of this risk assess- men a greemen an. emoran. a 0 On ers an tug

ment is to provide a more objective, evidence- and risk-based approach documents govern a hlgh lEVEI 0f Integratlon 0f mEdlcal
for aeromedical disposition. Using a 4 X 4 risk matrix, the probability of support through integrated crews, a common system
an event is plotted against the potential impact. Event probability is Of medical support and coordination Of crew health

derived from a detailed review of Clinical and aerospace literature, and tt th h th’ . . 1 f “.1 t 1

based on the best available evidence. The event impact (consequences) ma ers r0113 e princ1p e O mu 1 a er? Formerl-

is assessed and assigned within the matrix. Results: The result has been 5115- The resultmg mEdlcal support System 15 Hlterna'

a refinement of MSMB case assessment based on evidence-based data tional, robust, and comprehensive.

incorporated into a risk stratification process. This has encouraged an Medical certification Of ISS crewmembers is based on

objective assessment of risk and, in some cases, has resulted in recertifi- 11_ d t M d. 1 E 1 _

cation of crewmembers with medical conditions which hitherto would an a agency consensus ocumen“, e lca va ua
likely have been disqualifying. Conclusions: This paper describes a risk t10nS Document (MED) VOlume A; Medlcal Standards
matrix approach develeped for MSMB disposition'ciecisions. Such an for ISS Crewmembers.” Medical evaluations are carried
approach premotes objective, evndence-basedIdeCISIon-ma’kmg and IS out by the crewmember’s host agency based on testing
broadly appl'cable mm“ the aerospace mEd'Cme commumty' for selection and eriodic recertification defined in MED

Keywords: aerospace risk management, space medicine, International P . . .

Space Station. Volume A. The array of screening examinations and
tests is tailored to the expected duration of the mission
and, for long-duration (> 30 01) missions, includes de-

UMAN SPACEFLIGHT programs are intensely tailed laboratory examinations, including an infectious

Horiented t0 mission success and demand a high de- disease screeh, and imaging StUdleS SUCh as head MRI

gree of reliability from both the engineering and human and MR anglograPth CT . coronary ca1c1um scoring,

elements. Individuals selected for International Space DEX‘A} bone mineral den51ty, and ultrasound Of the

Station (ISS) missions are expected to maintain a high thyr01d, abdoinen, and pe1V1s. ASQECIQS inay elect to

level of performance throughout the demanding pre- carry out additional, agency-spec1f1c testing on their

ﬂight training phase, the round trip to orbit, and the crewmembers. .

orbital stay in microgravity. Development of new hu- MED Volume A document also contains the consen-

man space exploration programs serves as a powerful sus medicaistahdards used by the MSMB to assess f1t-

stimulus to continue improvement of medical risk man- ness for certificatlon of ISS crewmembers. Crewmembers
agement tools and to establish a comprehensive model require initial certification and annual recertification
that can be tested on the ISS platform in View of future by the MSMB. ISS medical certiﬁcates are valid for 1 yr.
missions. —

The Multilateral Space Medicine Board (MSMB) is the From the International Space Station Multilateral Space Medicine

ISS medical certification body for ISS crewmembers and Boa“?- , , , ,

h d b t t. 1 . . th t Thls manuscnpt was recelved for rev1ew 1n May 2010. It was ac-

as acciue su s an 1a experience in .e managemen cepted for publication in August 2010.

Of mEdlcal 1""ISkS 1n crewmembers- Thls CODtIDUOUSIY Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Gary W. Gray, M.D.,

growing body Of evidence on ISS missions from 10 d to Ph.D., Medical Assessment Section, DRDC Toronto, 1133 Sheppard Ave-

Over 6 mo in duration, along with the knowledge gained Hue we.St' Toronto' ON M3M 3139' Canada; gary'gmy@drdc'rddc'.gclca'

in th h t d1 d t. d . 1 Reprmt & Copyrlght © by the Aerospace Medlcal Assoc1at10n,

0 er S or - an ong- ura 10D programs an Slmu a- Alexandria, VA.
tion studies, is unique and highly valuable for the prep- DOI: 10.3357/ASEM.2829.2010
1128 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 12 - December 2010

"
"2","CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT—GRAY ET AL.

If any changes occur in the crewmember’s medical sta- 1- DEVEOIOPmEIIt 0f riSk matrices quaetifying both Probability 9f

tus, the information must be provide d to the MSMB. ?:rcllsleal events and consequences 1nduced by medlcal condl-

The MSMB may SUStath/ suspend, 01‘ reVOke the crew- 2. Development of an evidence-based process to include review of

member’s certification status based on thorough CODSid- relevant medical literature, to be used by 188 agencies when pre-

eration Of all relevant risks. We recently published MED senting individuals with medical issues for certification by the

Volume C a com anion ISS document containin the MSMB; and

O ’ O P g O 3. Identifying possible risk mitigations which might be used to re-
testing requirements and standards for short-duration duce risk duringtraining or Spaceﬂight

Visits by spaceﬂight participants to the 15$ (1). . .

Three certification categories exist to describe the type RtSk Matrices

and extent of activities permitted under 155 medical cer- A set of three 4 X 4 risk matrix tables was developed,

tificati0n(Tab1e I). MedicalDisposition Category (MDC) one for each MDC (Table II). For each of four rows, risk

1 identifies individuals certified for all duties, including levels are defined which bracket the annual probability of

hazardous training and thg-duration ISS missions a medical event occurring as a result of the particular

(> 30 d). MDC 2 is assigned to individuals certified for medical condition. The columns identify four classes of

hazardous training and short-duration missions to the medical events Which reﬂect the probable consequences

ISS. MDC 3 certification allows participation in hazard- of a medical event, with increasingly severe consequences

ous training, but not spaceﬂight. from Class 1 to Class 4. Within each cell in the risk matrix,

Medical conditions identified during the intensive the MSMB has defined an estimate of the level of risk as

medical screening, particularly those that may fall Low (L), Moderate (M), and High (H),

outside of published standards, require further investi- The rows reﬂecting increasing event rates from bottom

gation and consideration for a decision regarding med- to top are classified from Highly Unlikely (< 0.5% / yr),

ical certification/recertification. The standard process Unlikely (0.5—10/o/yr), Possible (1—20/o/yr), and Likely
early in the ISS manned program was for the host (2 2% / yr). This stratification of risk probability was

a gency to arrange the investigation of crewmembers arrived at after extensive MSMB discussions and is based

with medical conditions and to present the results of on considerations including the risk for a single medical

these investigations, With the Opinion Of thEiI‘ expert event requiring return to Earth during a 20-yr ISS lifespan
consultants, to the MSMB for deliberation. This process with six crewmembers. Further clarification on risk proba-
was similar to that used by many aeromedical certifica- bility categorization is provided in the discussion. The
tiOh agencies. columns reﬂect increasingly severe consequences of med-

ical events, classified as Class 1 t0 4. Table III shows the

METHODS definitions used to guide each class.

As part of an overall risk management program for

the human dimension in 155 operations, the MSMB has Procedures

evolved an eVidenee-based, riOle<-matr1x appioaeh te 155 For each crewmember with a medical issue identified

crewmember medieal d15p051t10h5- The ebjective 15 to by the Standards document as being potentially disquali-

develOpOa quantitative assessment 0t tlsk intrediiced by fying or requiring special consideration, the host agency
the medical cendition t0 the 1nd1V1Od1ial,the m1ss10n,O and is required to present the following information to the
the program in the process of training and spaceﬂight. MSMB:

The quantitative, risk-matrix assessment is used as

a tOOl by the MSMB in the aeromedical disposition 1. A detailed review of all relevant medical data on the crewmem-

1, O C e S S ber based on the premise of full disclosure.
P ' , , , 2. An evidence-based review with data derived from the medical
The Process Of a tlsk'matrlx and tlsk management alt)"" and aeromedical literature, as well as specialist consultant opin-
preach involves the following steps: ions detailing the potential risks associated with the condition.
TABLE I. MEDICAL DISPOSITION CATEGORIES (MDC) IN THE ISS PROGRAM.

Category Eligibility Main Characteristics

MDC1 < 180 d * All medical testing requirements in MED Vol. A have been completed. The candidate is medically
eligible for hazardous training in home country and Partner facilities, for a round-trip to the ISS, and
for long-duration stay aboard the ISS.

MDC 2 < 30 d Medical screening for short-duration missions has been completed. The candidate is medically eligible
for hazardous training in home country and Partner facilities, for a round-trip to the ISS, and a
short-duration stay aboard the ISS. The total duration of the mission may not exceed 30 d. The
candidate may not have completed the screening program for MDC 1 or have a medical condition
unsuitable for MDC 1 certification.

MDC 3 Training only The candidate is medically eligible for hazardous training in home country and Partner facilities, but
is not certified for spaceflight. This category may be used when a candidate is in training but has not
completed all the testing requirements for spaceflight, or who has a medical condition for which
evaluation is not completed, or full recovery is to be affirmed.

* The Partners have agreed to extend missions to 220 d on a mission-specific basis.

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 12 - December 2010 1129

"
"3","CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT—GRAY ET AL.
TABLE ”- MEDICAL RISK MATRIX TABLES FOR EACH MDC- ensure consistency in disposition decisions for similar
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4 condltlons'
MDC1 RESULTS

L'kel Z 2% M H H H .

Pbssible 2 1% < 2% M M H H . A total of 92 sess10ns oi the MSMB have taken place

Unlikely < 1% 2 0.5% L L M H s1nce 1998. The 101nt medlcal cert1f1cat10n experlence of

Highly unlikely < 05% L L L M the ISS partnership includes over 1110 certification events,

M?.i 2| > 20/ L M H H including over 200 primary certification discussions, 530
l e — o . . . .

Possible 2 1% < 2% L L M H recert1f1cat10ns, and 380 short-term status extensrons.

Unlikely < 1% 2 0.5% L L L M Over 90 special considerations were conducted, some

Highly unlikely < 0.5% L L L L resulting in the issuance of waivers for disqualifying

MD? 3 conditions or in a change to the medical disposition

Likely 2 2% L L M H t (. 1 d' t t t d 01

Possible 2 1% < 2% L L M M ca egory me 11 mg emporary s a us owngra. es 0r

Unlikely < 1% 2 05% L L L L suspens10ns). The Board s attent10n was not llrmted t0

Highly unlikely < 0.5% L L L L disqualifying disease only; many health and wellness

—. . . . . . issues and trends were also addressed.
LOW ”5k (L)._aCC‘?ptable W the g'Ven d'ipos't't’n; Mgderate ”i"" (M)._ Besides certification decisions, MSMB often issued
further conSIderatIon requnred for the given dlSpOSlthh, prefllght l’lSk , , ,
modification and (or) enhancement of in—flight medical capability will recommendatlons that concerned the candldate 5 health
be required; High risk (H)—unsuitable for the given disposition unless and wellness beyond the immediate scope or the standards
adequate l’lSk mOdlﬁcatlon is implemented and the overall rlSk IEVEI iS for ISS missions e.g. lifestyle modification or long_term
reduced to Low or Moderate. For real-time use the matrix is color-Coded, t t t fh I 1. I 'd . Of th . dd d b
with L 2 green, M 2 yellow, and H 2 red. rea men 0. yper .1p1 em1a. e 1ssues a . resse y
the MSMB 1n th1s trmeframe, 78% were class1f1ed as en-
docrine/metabolic, cardiovascular, pharmacotherapy,
gastrointestinal, otorhinolaryngological, ophthalmolog-
The analy31s should include an estimate of the risk of occurrence 1C a1, or combinations. The remaining issues (22%) were
of related med1calevent(s). 1 'f' d . t . . f t. d.

3. Athorough consideration of the potential consequences of related C aSSI 1e as gent ourlnary’ 1n ec 10118 lsease’ gyneco-
rnedical events on mission safety and mission completion, and loglcal, neurologlcal, mUSCUIOSkeletaL dental; 01‘ Other-
on the potential incremental health risk t0 the individual in the Risk matrix assessments have been used as a tool for cer—
space/microgravity environment. The evaluation should include tification d e CiSiOhS for a variety Of me di C al C 0n diti ODS for
the duration of the mission, consideration of the limited ISS . . . ’.
medical resources, any additional medical treatment capabilities example, caljdtaOC arrhythmlas pOStablatlon and OaUtOIm'
which might be required during the crewmember’s mission, and mune therIdltls. A subset Of these cases IS dlscussed
the effects of acceleration and Soyuz evacuation. below to illustrate this approach.

Based on the data resented b the host a enc and, . . . . .

. f .p y g y Example Condition: History of Sustained Supraventrzcular

1 necessary, further l1terature reV1ew by the MSMB, the T h h th ,

medical condition is assigned a risk cell within the risk ac WW y mm

matrix. Some medical conditions may have more than Episodes of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, includ-
one possible event of potential concern. In such cases, a ing atrial fibrillation, were recorded during medical
risk matrix assignment is made for each event of con- evaluation or monitoring during physically demanding
cern related to the medical condition. training activities in five crewmembers. The ISS medical

The level of risk identified by the risk matrix assess- standards consider supraventricular tachyarrhythmias,

ment (Low, Medium, High) is used as part of the medi- including atrial fibrillation, as possible grounds for medi-
cal decision process for medical certification of the cal disqualification. All candidates consented to thorough
crewmember with the particular medical condition. evaluation, including electrophysiological testing in spe-
Data from crewmembers presented to the MSMB for cialized clinical facilities. In all cases, the morphological
certification are tracked in a searchable, relational data- and functional causes of the condition were established
base. This allows all historic data from a particular crew- and appropriate radiofrequency ablation procedures
member to be reviewed, as well as dispositions for all were performed. Following postoperative assessment
crewmembers with a particular medical condition, to and monitoring, initial recovery, and discontinuation of
TABLE III. CLASSES OF IN-FLIGHT MEDICAL EVENTS.
Consideration Class 1 Event Class 2 Event Class 3 Event Class 4 Event
Overall Event Severity Minimal symptoms or signs Significant medical event, Major illness or injury Severe medical crisis
during mission; potential illness, or injury
long—term risk to individual
Performance Degradation None to moderate Significant Major Major loss of mission activity
Resource Utilization Limited Extensive May overwhelm medical Beyond capability of ISS
resources medical resources
Mission Impact No timeline changes May interfere with mission Planned medical evacuation Emergency medical
objectives considered evacuation considered
1130 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 12 - December 2010

"
"4","CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT—GRAY ET AL.
anticoagulant therapy, medical certification was rein- releasing hormone test. Using this algorithm, individ-
stated at MDC 3 level (training only). A 6-mo observa- uals with autoimmune thyroiditis and subclinical hypo-
tion regimen was instituted in every case. Subsequent to thyroidism may be identified who have a low risk of
complete re-evaluation of crewmembers with serial hypothyroidism developing over a 6-mo period. The
ECG, Holter monitoring, and exercise testing, the abla- MSMB considered such an event to be a Class 2 event,
tion procedure was determined to be successful. i.e., with a Low or Moderate impact. The potential risk
Detailed reView of the clinical medical literature, in- was further mitigated by developing onboard monitor-
cluding prospective and retrospective clinical trials ing capability for TSH and by approving thyroid re-
(Level 1 and 2 evidence), determined that the annual placement if indicated. Based on this risk matrix
probability of recurrence varied from highly unlikely [< assessment, with appropriate mitigating countermea-
0.5°/o for some ablated arrhythmias, to possible (1—2°/o) sures, several of these individuals have been certified
for atrial fibrillation]. The probable consequence was MDC 1 and have completed 185 missions. In the past,
assessed as a Class 2 event, i.e., a significant on-orbit the perception of the risks of hypothyroidism in ﬂight
medical event which might require extensive resource and the non-acceptance of chronic medications, includ-
utilization, but unlikely to require medical evacuation. ing thyroid replacement therapy, would have resulted
The overall impact of the ablated arrhythmias was, there- in permanent disqualification of these individuals.
fore, assessed from Low (Class 2, unlikely) to Moderate
(Class 2, possible). Using the risk matrix as a tool, with
extensive discussion, the MSMB proceeded with grant- DISCUSSION
ing unrestricted MDC 1 or MDC 2 certification status. The introduction of an eVidence-based risk-assessrnent
An appropriate waiver was issued in all cases to the approach has facilitated expanded communications and
standards to document the exception taken. To mitigate dialogue in the context of the ISS MSMB. Medical person-
the Moderate risl< cases, additional antiarrhythmic med- nel of the responsible national space agency are respon-
ications were manifested to be available during the as- sible for collecting the detailed background evidence
signed ﬂights and enhanced monitoring was carried required for placing a potential event in a specific cell of
out. All crewmembers consistently demonstrated excel- the risk matrix based on detailed review of current clin-
lent physical performance and the absence of any signs ical and aeromedical literature. Copies of applicable peer-
or symptoms of cardiac dysrhythmia during preﬂight reviewed publications are posted on the MSMB secure
training and actual missions. Thus the aggressive risl< workspace as part of each case. In their turn, consultants
modification with the use of modern medical technol- are provided with detailed data on mission profile, includ-
ogy (electrophysiological studies and radiofrequency ing physical and environmental factors and the crew-
ablation), combined with the eVidence-based approach member’s responsibilities, in addition to the medical
to risk consideration, allowed retention of five highly data. Specific questions are posed about the probability,
trained crew crewmembers in the 155 program. In the course, severity, and likely outcome of each manifesta-
past, it is unlikely that medical certification bodies at the tion and / or complication of each l<nown condition, as
agency level would have certified these individuals for well as available resources for onboard management.
spaceﬂight even at the national level, hence their cases In the presentation of the eVidence-based review,
would not have reached the multilateral certification agencies are encouraged to include information as to the
board. quality of evidence from which the data were derived, i.e.,
from prospective or retrospective clinical trials, case con-
Example Condition: Autoimmune Thyroiditis with troldstudies,case-series, or expert opinion: The quality Of
, , , , eV1 ence is integrated into the determination of the level
Subclmzcal Hyp 0thyr01dzs m of uncertainty associated with the overall risk-matrix as-
In a number of ISS crewmembers and candidates, el- sessment and resulting medical certification. For higher
evated levels of antithyroid (antiperoxidase) antibodies levels of uncertainty, acceptable risk must be adjusted
have been detected during annual screenings. In four of downwards in the risk matrix. Included in risk manage-
these cases, thyroid ultrasound demonstrated diffuse ment considerations are considerations for risk mitiga-
changes of the gland consistent with thyroiditis. Per tion during missions,e.g.,by manifesting pharmacologic
the 2006 Guidelines of the American Association of or other countermeasures specifically identified for the
Endocrinologists, such combination of findings is suffi- individual crewmember. For example, as outlined in the
cient to diagnose autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis, two cases, additional monitoring requirements and spe-
with subclinical hypothyroidism if the thyroid-stirnulating cific antiarrhythmia medications were manifested for
hormone (TSH) is elevated but serum thyroid hormone crewmembers with ablation-treated cardiac arrhythmias.
levels are normal. An algorithm approach was devel- The event rates probabilities (highly unlikely to likely)
oped to further stratify the risk of progression from sub- in the Risk Matrix rows were generated from consider-
clinical to overt hypothyroidism, a condition which ation of both clinical and aerornedical sources. From
could have a significant impact on a crewmember’s clinical cardiologic literature, for example, Framingham
ability to function nominally over a long-duration mis- probability rates are defined as low (< 10% / decade or
sion. The algorithm incorporates current TSH levels and 1% /yr), moderate (10—20% / decade or 1—2°/o /yr), and
assessment of thyroid reserve with a thyroid hormone high (> 20% / decade or 2% / yr) (4), correlating with our
Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 12 - December 2010 1131

"
"5","CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT—GRAY ET AL.
risk matrices Unlikely/Possible/Likely categories. The result of certifying such individuals, but the potential
”1% rule” has long been discussed as an acceptable aer- impact of doing so could be catastrophic and the process
omedical cut-off for event rates derived from data on is meant to complement rather than override sound aero-
aircraft structural and mechanical failure rates (5). The medical judgment. The risk matrix approach developed
1% rule, however, was derived for aircraft Operations of for MSMB disposition decisions promotes objective, eVi-
relatively short duration and is, therefore, not directly dence-based decision-making and is broadly applicable
applicable to 155 Operations where the exposure dura- within the aerospace medicine community.
tion may be up to 6 m0. Further computation of accept-
able event rates. on lSS was .derived with the medical ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
0b]ectlve Of mlnlmIZIDg the l‘lsk toward zero Of a s1ngle The risk matrix approach was a product of the ISS Multilateral
medical evacuation being required over the life Of the Space Medicine Board, whose members include representatives from
- _ - - - each 188 Agency, including JAXA (previously Dr. Shoichi Tachibana),
155' Assumlng a 20 Yr hfe span Wlth SIX crewmembers ESA (Dr. Paul Kuklinski), and the FSA (Dr. Vladimir Pochuev). The
(maX1mum usage),th18translatest0 120 PETSOD-yeal‘s 0“ authors would like to acknowledge the input from all 188 agency
155. To minimize an evacuation scenario to less than one representatives . .
over the life Of the 155 would re uire event rates for Authors and Lyfﬁlzatzons:Gary W.Gray, M.D.,Ph.D.,MedicalAssessment
Cl 3 4 t 1 th 0 83:} / 1 X 100/120 Section, DRDC, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and Ashot E. Sargsyan,
ass 01‘ even S 888 an ' 0 yr ( . . ) M.D., Space Medicine, Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering, and
Thus for ClaSS 3 01‘ 4 €V€Dt rates, the probablllty Of GVGDtS Jeffrey R. Davis, Space Life Sciences, NASA Johnson Space Center,
must be unlikely or highly unlikely to be acceptable for Houston, TX-
consideration for an ISS mission.
The risk matrix approach is not without potential pit- REFERENCES
falls, including a sometimes overenthusiastic perception 1- BogomOIOV, VV, C&SthCI F: C0mt01?JMI Damann V, Dams JR/ 9t, 3‘1-
f b. ti it when risk assessment iS base d on lower International Space Station medical standards and certification
0 0 ]8C V .y . . . for space ﬂight participants. Aviat Space Environ Med 2007;
levels of eVidence which result in higher levels of uncer- 78:1162—9.
minty, which may be downplayed in the decision-making 2. Davis JR. Medical issues for a mission to Mars. Aviat Space Environ
discussions. The risk matrix is best used as a means to MEd 1999; 70162—31
, , , , , , , 3. DaVis JR, Fogarty IA, Richard EE. Human health and performance
fac111tate objective d1scuss10ns and not as a determinate risk management_an approach for exploration missions. Ada
decision-making tool. Overall, the risk stratification ap- Astronaut 2008; 63:988—95.
preach at MSMB has been successful in encouraging de_ 4. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
tailed evidence-based case reviews with risk assessments BIOOd ChOIESterOI m Adults“ Executwe Summary Of the Thud
’ . . . Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP)
based on the rlsk matrlces. In some, but certamly not all Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High
cases, this has allowed certification of crewmembers who Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA
- - - ° 2001; 285:2486—97.
magrhﬁvg beendPI‘ZVlOUtSIlly dlscllluaélﬁeql bda sed.801e1¥h0n 5. Tunstall-Pedoe H. Risk of a coronary heart attack in the normal
pu IS e Stan ar S Wlt OUt t e etal e I'EVIEW. us population and how it might be modified in ﬂyers. Eur Heart]
far, there have been no untoward medlcal events as a 1984,- 5(Supp1. A):43—9.
1132 Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine - Vol. 81, N0. 12 - December 2010

"
