"","x"
"1","ASTROBIOLOGY
Volume 8, Number 2, 2008
© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ast.2008.1226
Sess10n 2. Advances in Astrobiological
Instrumentation Development

Session Organizers: Sanjoy Soml, Steve Vancel’z, Inge ten Kate3, Andrew Steele4
[University of Washington,USA, 2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA, 3NASA Goddard Space F light
Center, USA, 4 Carnegie Institution of Washington, USA

Astrobiology science goals are important in defining the science requirements for many future planetary and as—
tronomical missions. These goals include not only the direct search for evidence of life, but also the Characteriza—
tion of planetary environments to assess past or present habitability. This session aims to bring together astrobiol—
ogy scientists and engineers to address these requirements and to aid their translation into instruments and
instrumentation suites. We inVite original contributions that discuss instrument design, development and testing for
astrobiologically relevant space missions, whether they involve remote or in Sim analyses. We also welcome pres—
entations that propose new approaches or analytical methods of astrobiological interest from currently deployed in—
struments or that could be the basis of future instruments, as well as reviews of the current state of instrumentation.
2-01-P. Astrobiology from Europan Orbit 2-02-0. Novel Subcritical Water Extraction Methods for

Studying the Mechanisms of Biomarker Preservation in

Mark Allen (Mark.Allen@jpl.nasa.g0v), Pat Beauchamp, Robert Minerals and Ices
Carlson, Ken Cooper, Brian Drouin, John Pearson, Herb Pickett,
David Rodgers, Peter Siegel, Anders Skalare, Sam Gulkis, Goutarn Xenia Amashukeli (Xenia.Amashukeli@jpl.nasa.g0v), Susanne
Chattopadhyay Douglas, Anita M. Fisher, Frank J . Grunthaner
Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technology, USA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA

The ﬂux 0f chemical compounds introduced into the tenuous Eh"" Biomarkers, such as amino acids, are preserved inside mineral ma—
1“0133111 atmosphere due to energetlc charged particle sputtering hf the trices and ices for many years. If there is, or ever was, life on Mars and
surface 1ee directly reﬂects the e0mp0s1t10n 0f the lee. 1h partlcular, Europa, the biomarkers are likely to be found inside the regolith and
anytorganlc cornpounds, formed 1h the sub—ice oceantand entrained 1h ice. Consequently, the successful achievement of life—detection mis—
the ley crust, Wlh enter the atmosphere 1h th_15 sputterlng precess. Thls sions’ goals Will greatly depend on sample preparation instruments de—
PteVldeS the opportunlty to remotely deteirnine the surface ice compo— signed to efficiently extract potential biomarkers With minimum change
s1t10n through an analys1s 0f the cornp0s1t10n 0f the Europan sptutter ht"" of their original properties. Here we Will present our subcritical water
mOSPhere and PIOVIdeS an_ Opportunlty t0100k for astrqblfﬂoglcal Slg- extractor (SCWE) (Amashukeli et al., J. Geophys. Res., 2007) tech—
natures frem Europan 0rb1t. We have developed a preliminary design nology and methods developed for extraction of biomarkers from var—
for an 0rb1ter—based radar spectrometer that can .measure minor spe01es ious mineral matrices and ices that may constitute martian regolith and
1h the Europan atmosphere. The radar 15 sens1t1ve t0 the total column Europa’s ocean ice. The results of work Will enable the formulation of
Of rnolecules between the spacecraft and the surface. Based 0h con— the mechanisms by Which biomarkers are preserved inside the miner—
yentional radar concepts ttt longer wavelengths, the 1hSthhheht concept als and ices. Furthermore, the extraction data Will enable future defin—
includes, onboard an 0rb1ter, 3} transmltter hhhhlhatlhg a spot on the itions and developments of the sample processing instruments that Will
surface and a heteredyne receiver detectlng the baek—scattered rad1a— provide extracts containing biomarkers to a variety of analytical in—
tleh- Ah molecnles 1h the atmosphere Wlth an electrlc or magnetic d1"" struments. Data Will also provide additional information that may aid
pole absorb radlatlon at the mllhmeter and submllhmeter wavelengths the selection process Of the potential martian sampling sites for the fu_
at Which the spectrometer Will operate. Our calculations show that po— ture life—detection missions.
lar species, such as organic N— and S—containing compounds and inor—
ganic salts, if present at ppm levels in the ice, Will be detectable. De—
tection sensitivity is orders of magnitude larger than traditional limb
thermal emission spectrometry. In addition, the radar spectrometer ob—
servations provide insight into the physical characteristics of the enVi—
ronment (sputter velocities, magnetic field), the surface, and the range
between the surface and satellite.

296

"
"2","2-03-P. Peptide Nucleic Acids: from the “Pre-RNA 2-05-0. Astrobiology Sample Analysis Program (ASAP)
World” to Biosensor Applications in Astrobiology for Advanced Life Detection Instrumentation
Development and Calibration
Carlos Briones (brioneslc@inta.es), Eva Mateo—Marti, Celia
Rogero, JOSG Angel Martin—Gago Daniel Glavin1 (daniel.p.glaVin@nasa.gov), William Brinckerhoffl,
Centro de AStVObiOlOSia (CSIC-INTA), Spain Jason Dworkinl, Jennifer Eigenbrodel, Heather Franzl, Paul
Mahaffyl, Jennifer Sternl, Lou Allamandolaz, David Blakez, Scott
Peptide nucleic acid (PNA) is a nucleic acid analogue Characterized Sandfordz, Xenia Amashukeli3, Anita Fisher3, Frank Grunthaner3,
by a Chemically stable pseudopeptidic backbone that lacks sugar mo— Marc Fries3, Andrew Steele4, Andrew Aubrey5, Jeffrey Bada5, Rich
tifs, carries no Charges and has no Chiral centers. As a consequence, Mathies6, David Bish7, Steve Chiperag, Catherine Corrigan9
PNA has been proposed as a suitable candidate to have preceded RNA INASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA, 2NASA Ames Research
at the first stages of molecular evolution, in the so—called “Pre—RNA Center, USA, 3 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA, 4Camegie
world”. In the context of the origin and early evolution of genetic in— Institution of Washington, USA, , 5Scripps Institution of
formation, it is also relevant to the role that inorganic surfaces could Oceanography, USA, 6University Of California, Berkeley, USA,
have played, bOth in the catalysis Of the pOlymelZElthIl Of macromol— 71ndiana University, USA, 8Chesapeake Energy Corporation, USA,
ecules, and in the stabilization of such polymers. Therefore, we have 9J0hns Hopkins University, Applied Physics Laboratory, USA
investigated the interaction of single stranded PNAs (ssPNAs) on metal
surfaces, as a fifSt approach for understanding the f01€ played by Sllf- Scientific ground—truth measurements for near—terrn Mars missions
faces and DUCIGiC acids during pre—cellular GVOhltiOIl. We have reported are essential for validating current in situ ﬂight instrumentation and for
that SSPNA chains 0f 1113 t0 7 nm long can spontaneously self—assem— the development of advanced instrumentation technologies for life—de—
ble on certain surfaces, rendering ordered layers of standing—up mole— tection missions over the next decade. The NASA Astrobiology Insti-
cules With maximized capability to interact With complementary target tute (NAI) has recently funded a consortium of researchers called the
molecules. Self—assernbled monolayers of ssPNA on surfaces are sta— Astrobiology Sample Analysis Program (ASAP) to analyze an identi—
ble in pure water and salty buffers, I‘CSlSt desiccation/re—hydration Gy- cal set of homogenized martian analog materials in a “found—robin”
Cles, remain insensitive to biological or Chemical degradation, and show style using both state—of—the—art laboratory techniques as well as in situ
an outstanding resistance to high energy radiation. Interestingly, the use ﬂight instrumentation, including the S AM gas chromatograph mass
0f surface characterization techniques has ShOWh that layers 0f PNA spectrometer and CHEMIN X—ray diffraction/fluorescence instruments
adsorbed on SUI‘fElCCS maintain their capability for recognizing COHIplC- 0n the 2009 Mars Science Laboratory, and the Urey and MOMA 01‘-
mentary nucleic acids with enough specificity to discriminate even a ganic analyzers under development for the 2013 ExoMars missions.
point mutation in target DNA or RNA. These structural and functional The analog samples studied included an Atacama Desert soil from
results have encouraged the use of PNA molecules as optimized probes Chile, the Murchison meteorite, a gypsum sample from the 2007
in biosensors useful for astrobiological applications. AMASE Mars analog site, jarosite from Panoche Valley, CA, a hy—
drothermal sample from Rio Tinto, Spain, and a “blind” sample col—
2_04_P. A Nanoelectronic Chemical Sensor for In Situ ICCth during the 2007 MSL SlOW-motion ﬁeld test in NCW MCXiCO.
Liquid Chromatography Each sample was distributed to the team for analysis to: (1) determine
the nature and inventory of organic compounds, (2) measure the bulk
Stephanie Gettyl (Stephanie.A.Getty@nasa.gov), Gunther carbon and nitrogen isotopic cornposition, (3) investigate elemental
Kleteteschkaz, Tomoko Adachiz Vilem MikulaZ, Yun Zhengl, David abundances, mlneralogy and matrlxi and (4) search for biological ac—
anZJ, Jennifer Eigenbrodel, Paul Mahaffyl, Jason Dworkinl t1V1ty. The experimental results obta1ned fhom the ASAP Mars analog
[NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA, ZCatholic University Of reseaich consortlum w11l be used to.1) bulld a fhamework for under—
America, US A standlng the blogeochemlstry of martlan analogs, 11) help callbrate cur—
rent spaceﬂight instrumentation, and iii) enhance the scientific return
The ability to Chemically analyze liquid samples in situ will be critical from upcoming m1ss1ons.
to detecting and Characterizing biologically signiﬁcant organic species in
the exploration of the Solar System, including Mars, Enceladus, and Eu— 2-06-0. Spectropolal‘imetl‘y: A Stellar and Circumstellal‘
ropa. One powerful technique for such analysis is liquid Chromatography Probe
(LC); when combined with advanced derivatization techniques and an ap—
propriate detector, LC can be used to determine the presence and Chiral— David Harrington (dmh@ifa.hawaii.edu) and Jeff Kuhn
ity of complex organic molecules, such as amino acids [Glavin, D.P., University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy, USA
Dworkin, J .P., et al. (2006) Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 41: 889—902.] and lipids.
Towards a miniaturized LC system for use on planetary surfaces, we are The near—star environment around young stars is very dynamic with
developing a nanoscale Chemical sensor based on a silicon nanowire ﬁeld winds, disks, and outﬂows. These processes are involved in star and
effect transistor that promises sensitivity in the range of tens of femto— planet formation, and inﬂuence the formation and habitability of plan—
rnoles. The compact, low mass, low power, fully electronic nature of the ets around host stars. The planets can also be inﬂuenced by stellar
sensor suggests that high redundancy 0f multiplexing Will be possible in processes. Even for the Closest young stars, this will not be imaged even
a simple, scalable package. Furthermore, recent work reported in the 1it- after the completion of the next generation of telescopes decades from
erature suggests that this technology is compatible with surface function— now, and other proxies must be used. The polarization of light across
alization approaches, such as molecularly imprinted polymers Of self—as— individual spectral lines is such a proxy that contains information about
sembled monolayers of Chemical complements, to enable highly speciﬁc the geometry, density, and thermodynamic properties of Circumstellar
detection of targeted molecules in future development. We will report on material on these small spatial scales as well as magnetic field infor—
recent efforts to fabricate and Characterize silicon nanowire transistors and mation about the host star. We have recently built and calibrated a high—
discuss implications for the realization of a sensitive and adaptable Chern— resolution spectropolarimeter for the 3,67 m AEOS telescope. We used
iCﬂl sensor technology. this instrument to monitor many young intermediate—mass stars, and
have developed a new model based solely on radiative processes for
interpreting these results. We have also used the ESPaDOnS spec—
tropolarimeter on the 3.6m CFHT telescope to perform a star—spots &
magnetic fields study of low—mass stars, as well as other programs. In
the context of astrobiology, these instruments provide a way to mea—
sure many properties of young stars, and help understand the Circum—
stellar environment. We will present the instrumental capabilities as
well as results of a few programs to illustrate this rapidly developing
technique.
297

"
"3","2-07-P. The Microbial Detection Array (MiDA)— power, robust imaging system with no mobile parts, able to operate at very
Prototype Test Results low temperature (— 120°C). The opto—rnechanical interfaces will be a tita—
nium smart assembly capable of sustaining a wide range in temperature.
Alexander Hoehn1 alexander.h0ehn@Coloradoedu), Kennda L. The concept beneﬁts from well—proven heritage: Proba, Rosetta, MarsEX—
Lyncha, Paul Koeniga, Hansdieter Schweiger3, Igor 1. Brown4, press and Smart—l mission The Close—up imager CLUPI 0n the EXOMars
Charles Galind04, Jason Kapit5, Suzanne M.M. Y0ung5, Samuel 1). Rover will be described together with its capabilities to provide important
K0unaves5 information that can offer signiﬁcant contributions to the understanding of
[University Of Colorado-Boulder, USA, 2University Of Colorado, the geological environment and that could identify outstanding potential
USA, 3Technical University Munich, Germany, 4NASA Johnson biofabrics (stromatolites) 0f past life on Mars.
Space Center, USA, 5Tufts University, USA
2-09-P. Automated Sample Preparation for Life Detection
MiDA, a life detection prototype, developed under the 2005 NASA As— Technologies
trobiology Science and Technology Instrument Development (ASTID) pro—
gram, employs electrochemical sensor arrays to simultaneously monitor Kennda Lynchl (Kennda.Lynch@coloradoedu), Charles Galindoa,
two heat—sterilized, aqueous sample solutions for time—dependent chemi— Dan Garris0n3
cal composition Changes, using Ion—Selective Electrodes (ISE). One of the [University Of Colorado at Boulder, USA, 2 Mum'z Engineering, USA,
otherwise identical two Chambers is ultimately inoculated with a very small, 3 B a rrio s Technology, U S A
n0n—sterilized portion of the native sample, potentially leading to growth
and subsequent detectable metabolism—induced Changes in that Chamber Sample preparation technology presents a Signiﬁcant Challenge to the
only. Relative changes can be used as an indicator for life, With minimal advancement of in situ life detection instruments being developed for
assumptions about the organisms and their metabolic pathways. The ISE future robotic missions. Techniques and instruments have been adapted
sensors were developed With emphasis on small size, the use of a single from the medical and biotechnology industries to detect key biosigna—
non—interfering universal reference electrode and sensitivity to the most tures and are currently being successfully utilized in various planetary
likely ions affected by metabolism in an aqueous solution. Biological tests analogue environments. However, several Of these hfe detection tech—
are under way using a variety of organisms to characterize typical response— niques involve some level of sample extraction and/or preparation and
curves in isolated and mixed cultures, as well as using native samples with hence require a substantial amount Of human interaction prior to analy—
unknown organisms, in both deﬁned media and twater'Ohryt added to the sis. An autonomous sample preparation system must be incorporated
sample material. Developed hardware includes both bench top growth so that these methods can be considered for in situ analytical suites 0n
Chambers for integrated sensor and biology testing, as well as an integrated future robotic missions. A prototype autonomous system was designed
prototype ﬁeld unit, demonstrating and characterizing key technologies, and constructed to evaluate the critical sample preparation functions
and identifying missing technologies necessary for fully autonomous ﬂight that would be required for support of life detection instrumentation. The
instrument development. For the prototype, where cost was prohibitive, Limulus Ameboeyte Lysate (LAL) assay, which detects lipids specific
manual user intervention was implemented to demonstrate the integrated to gram—negative bacteria, has a simple extraction protocol and thus
science operations. However, design concepts were already developed, and was selected as the model detection technique to be tested with the first—
will be presented, for such key elements as autonomous sample receipt and generation prototype. The L AL assay was also selected because there
metering, inoculation, the valVing between the outside vacuum, the auto— was already a compact, portable assay technology that was commer—
Clave and the temperature—sensitive reaction Chambers, as well as mini— cially available and could be easily integrated with the prototype sam-
n1izing loss of sample materials during transfer between components of the ple preparation system. The design evolution, challenges, and con—
instrument. struction of the prototype sample preparation system will be presented
as will results from experiments conducted on geological samples 0b—
2-08-0. CLUPI: CLose-UP Imager 0n the ExoMars tained from the Rio Tinto subsurface environment.
Mission Rover, Tool for Identifying Potential Biofabrics
on Mars 2-10-0. Exploration of the Habitability of Mars with the
SAM Suite Investigation on the 2009 Mars Science
Jean-Luc Josset1 (jean-luc.josset@space-X.ch), J .-L. Jossetr, Laboratory
F. Westalla, B. A. H0fmann3, J . G. Spray4, C. CockellS, S. Kempee,
A- 13- Griffiths7, A- Coradinig, L- Colangeli9, 13- Koschnyro, Paul Mahaffy1 (Paul.R.Mahaffy@nasa.g0V), Michel Cabanea, Chris
D. Pullan11 Webster3
[Space Exploration Institute, Switzerland, 2Centre de Biophysique [NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA, zService d’Aeronomie,
Moléculaire, Orléans, France, 3Natural History Museum, Bern, CNRS, and the University Of Paris, France, 3Jet Propulsion
Switzerland, 4Planetary and Space Science Centre, University of Laboratory, USA
New Brunswick, Canada, 5Planetary and Space Sciences Research
InStil‘Ul‘e, 0196"" University, M ilton Keynes UK, 6Geosciences The 2009 Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), with a substantially larger
U nive r S ity of Technology, Darmstadt Ge r many, 7University College payload capability than any other Mars rover to date, is designed to quan—
London, UK, 81stitut0 di F isica delta Spazie Interplaneratrio, Roma titatively assess a local region on Mars as a potential habitat for present
Italy, 90sservat0r10 Astronomzco dz Capodzmonte, Napolz, Italy, . or past life. Its goals are (1) to assess past or present biological potential
IOESA’ RSSD’ NOOVdlek, The Netherlands, HD6196” tmem‘ 0f Physzcs of a target environment, (2) to characterize geology and geochemistry at
and Astronomy, University of Leicester, UK the MSL landing site, and (3) to investigate planetary processes that in—
_ _ _ ﬂuence habitability. The Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) Suite, currently
The CLose—UP Imager (CLUPI) imaging experiment 15 des1gned to ob— in its ﬁnal stages of integration and test, enables a sensitive search for or—
tain high—resolution colour and stereo images of rocks from the European ganic molecules and chemical and isotopic analysis Of martian volatiles.
Mission EXOMars roVer (Pasteur payload). The CLUPI is a robotic equiV— MSL contact and remote surface and subsurface survey instruments es—
alent 0f one Of the most useful instruments a ﬁeld geologist carries: the tablish context for these measurements and facilitate sample identiﬁcation
hand lens. Imaging surfaces of rocks, soils and wind drift deposits is cru— and selection. The S AM instruments are a gas chromatograph (GC), a
Cial for the understanding of the geological context of any site where the mass spectrometer (MS), and a tunable laser spectrometer (TLS). These
roVer will be active on Mars. The purpose of the CLUPI is to look at a together with supporting sample manipulation and gas processing devices
surface area of about 4 cm X 2.6 cm at a focus distance of 10 cm. With a are designed to analyze either the atmospheric composition or gases eX—
resolution of approx. 15 micrometer/pixel, many Characteristics of rock tracted from solid phase samples such as rocks and ﬁnes. For example,
surfaces and internal structures can be Visualized, such as crystals in ig— one Of the core S AM experiment—sequences heats a small powdered sam—
neous rocks, fracture mineralization, secondary minerals, details of the sur— ple Of a Mars rock or soil from ambient to ~13()() K in a controlled man—
face morphology, sediment components, sedimentary structures, and soil ner while continuously monitoring evolved gases. This is followed by
particles. It is conceivable that even textures resulting from ancient bio— GCMS analysis Of released organics. The general Chemical survey is com—
logical activity can be seen, such as ﬁne lamination due to microbial mats plemented by a Speciﬁc search for molecular Classes that may be relevant
(stromatolites) and textures resulting from colonies of ﬁlamentous mi— to life including atmospheric methane and its carbon isotope with the TLS
crobes. CLUPI is a powerful, highly integrated, miniaturized (208 g), low— and bio—rnarkers with the GCMS.
298

"
"4","2-11-0. Lab-on-a-Chip: From Astrobiology to the 2-13-P. Protein-Based Sensors to Detect Chemical
International Space Station Markers of Life
Jake Maule1 (jmaule@ciw.edu), Norrn Wainwrightz, Andrew Chad Paavola1 (Chad.Paavola@nasa.gov), Mohiuddin Kabirz,
Steelel, Dan Gunter3, Lisa Monaco3, Jacobs Sverdrup3, Mark Amanda Crochet3, Matthew Francis3
Wells4, Heather Morris5, Mark BoudreauX3 [NASA Ames Research Center, USA, ZSETI Institute, USA, 3UC
[Carnegie Institution of Washington, USA, 2Charles River Berkeley, USA
Laboratories, USA, 3NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, USA,
4University of Alabama at Huntsville (UAH), USA, 5Jacobs We are developing optical sensors for small organic molecules that
Engineering Inc, USA are associated with living things. Specific organic Chemical compounds,

such as amino acids and carbohydrates, are attractive targets as bio—

The continual and long—term habitation of enclosed environments, markers in extraterrestrial environments because of the central roles

such as Antarctic stations, nuclear subrnarines and space stations, raises they occupy in terrestrial biochemistry. These compounds, however,
unique engineering, medical and operational Challenges. There is no are also produced by abiotic processes. In order to distinguish biolog—
easy way out and no easy way to get supplies in. This situation ele— ical compounds from those of abiotic origin, it is necessary to exam—
Vates the importance of monitoring technology that can rapidly detect ine Characteristics like stereochemistry and isotopic ratios. The sensors
events within the habitat that affect crew safety such as fire, release of we are developing are based on a family of proteins that microbes use
toxic Chemicals and hazardous microorganisms. Traditional methods to to sense nutrients in their surroundings. Each member of this family
rnonitor microorganisms on the International Space Station (188) have binds a specific analyte with stereochemical specificity. These proteins
consisted of culturing samples for 3—5 days and eventual sarnple—return undergo a conformational Change on ligand binding. By attaching two
to Earth. To augment these culture methods with new, rapid molecular different fluorophores to specific sites on the protein, it is possible to
techniques, we developed the Lab—on—a—Chip Application Develop— couple a spectral Change to analyte binding using ﬂuorescence reso—
rnent—Portable Test System (LOCAD—PTS). The system consists of a nance energy transfer. This spectral Change can be readily detected us—
hand—held spectrophotometer, a series of interchangeable cartridges and ing compact, inexpensive, off—the—shelf technology. We have produced
a surface sampling/dilution kit that enables crew to collect samples and three sensors for amino acids based on this approach using proteins de—
detect arange of biological molecules, all within 15 minutes. LOCAD— rived from rnesophilic and thermophilic organisms, and are in the
PTS was launched to the ISS aboard Space Shuttle Discovery in process of producing additional sensors for carbohydrates like glucose.
December 2006, where it was operated for the first time during This technology will make it possible to detect enantiorneric excesses
MarCh—May 2007. The surfaces of five separate sites in the US Lab in biological compounds that are indicative of past or present living or—
and Node 1 of 188 were analyzed for endotoxin, using cartridges that ganisrns.
employ the Lirnulus Arnebocyte Lysate (LAL) assay; results of these
tests will be presented. LOCAD—PTS will remain permanently onboard 2-14-0. The Mars OXidant Instrument
ISS w1th new cartrldges scheduled for launch 1n February and October
of .2008 forthe .deteetion of fungi (,B—glucan) and Grarn—positive bac— Richard Quinnl (Richard.C.Quinn@nasa.gov), Aaron Zentz, Frank
ter1a (llpotelch01c aold), respectlvely. J. Grunthaner3, Pascale Ehrenfreund4

[SET] Institute/NASA Ames Research Center, USA, 2NASA Ames
2-12-P. Next Generation LOCAD-PTS Cartridge Research Center, USA, 3NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA,
Development 4Leiden Institute of Chemistry, The Netherlands
Lisa Monaco1 (lisa.a.rnonaco@nasa.gov), Heather Morrisl, Jake Under development for a potential contribution to the ESA’s Exo—
Maulez, Dana Nutter3, Ed Weite3, Mark Wells4, Michael Darnon5, Mars mission, the Mars Oxidant Instrument (MOI) uses a sensor array
Andrew Steele6, Norrn Wainwright3 to Characterize the Chemical processes that modify organic compounds
[Jacobs Engineering, Inc.) USA, 2Carnegie Institution of Science, In the martian environment. AS part Of the Urey instrument package,
USA, 3Charles River Laboratories, USA, 4 University of Alabama at MOI provides a simple yet robust method of assessing the oxidant Char—
Huntsville, USA, 5BAE Systems, USA, 6Carnegie Institution of acteristics of sample material and evaluating how oxidation reactions
Science, USA may have altered the original organic components. MOI measures the

reaction rates of films that have different sensitivities to oxidants eX—

As future exploration missions to other planets unfold, advanced pected to be present in the martian surface environment. By control—
technologies capable of detecting low—level biochemical signatures re— ling the temperature Of these films and their exposure to dust ultravi—
rnain necessary tools. Furthermore, the ability to analyze samples at the olet light and water vapor, MOI Will evaluate organic degradation
point of collection in near real—time is particularly desirable. In order pathways that may take place at sampled localities on Mars. These data
to address the requirements for rapid, precise detection of a variety of Will provide important insights into the observed organic matter in—
biochemical molecules, the Lab—On—a—Chip Application Develop— ventory and the potential for survival of various Classes of organic com—
rnent—Portable Test System (LOCADPTS), based on the EndosafeTM— pounds under rnartian environmental conditions. In combination with
PTS technology marketed by Charles River Laboratories, was devel- a direct search for organic compounds by other payload instruments,
oped and is currently operating aboard the International Space Station MOI will allow the Characterization of rnartian carbon Chemistry in situ.
(188) This system uses a capillary action cartridge technology capable These results Will be especially critical in the case Of a failure to de—
of detecting small quantities of the bacterial compound lipopolysac- tect organic components by other instruments, or the detection of mod—
Charide (LPS). We present data describing a progression of continuing ified organic intermediates. A key to understanding C&I‘bOH Chemistry
technology development—frorn expanding the detection capabilities of on Mars lies not only in identifying soil oxidants, but also in charac—
the current PTS unit to increasing the number of compounds that can terizing the dominant reaction mechanisms and kinetics Of oxidative
be detected by using protein microarrays. To highlight the adaptability processes that are occurring on the planet. These processes may have
of the cartridge format, we present kinetic and reproducibility data decomposed or modified any organic material that might have survived
demonstrating the concentration of the fungal cell wall compound beta— from an early hiOtiC period.
glucan. To expand the number of compounds tested simultaneously, we
provide preliminary data from a modified PTS cartridge design hous—
ing a protein rnicroarray with features designed to detect four bio—
chemical signatures. Additionally, we present data from a Mars analog
environment where PTS technology was used to validate the sterility
of astrobiological sampling protocols. Collectively, the data demon—
strate that these new cartridges expand the number of compounds de—
tected by LOCAD—PTS, while maintaining the rapid, in situ analysis
Characteristic of the instrument.
299

"
"5","2-15-0. Remote Raman System for Astromineralogical 2-17-P. Towards a Remote Sensing Capability for Life’s

and Astrobiological Applications Chiral Signature

Fernando Rull (rull@frnc.uva.es), Alberto Vegas, Pablo Sobron, William Sparks1 (sparks@stsci.edu), Thornas Gerrnerz, James

Tayro Acosta, Aurelio Sanz, Jesus Medina Hough3, Feng Chen4, Shiladitya DasSarrna4, Priya DasSarrna4’

University of Valladolid, Unidad Asociada UVA-CSIC, al Centro de Nadine Manset5, Ludrnilla Kolokolova6, Neill Reid1

Astrobiologia, Spain [Space Telescope Science Institute, USA, ZNational Institute of
Standards and Technology, USA, 3University of Hertfordshire, UK,

Rernote Raman spectroscopy has demonstrated its potential in the iden— 4Center of Marine Biotechnology, UMBI, USA, 5Canada-France-
tiﬁcation of minerals and organics at distances ranging from several rneters Hawaii Telescope, Canda, 6University of Maryland, USA
to more than 200 meters. The possibility of remote Characterization of ma—
terials offers particular advantages over the contact mode in robotic rnis— A unique Characteristic of life is its macroscopic hornochirality. This
sions with landers or rovers in planetary exploration. This remote Charac— offers the potential of a remote sensing diagnostic since a Chiral sig—
terization can also be useful for detecting hydrocarbon plumes and gas nature can be revealed with Circular polarization observations. A col—
hydrates on planetary surfaces. In the case of the future sarnple return rnis— laborative effort is being undertaken between STSCI, COMB and NIST
sions, the remote target identiﬁcation could be crucial in a rapid operation in which we are exploring the quantitative Circular polarization signal
rnode, identifying the potential samples to be selected. We describe a re— produced by primitive photosynthetic and phototrophic astrobiologi—
rnote Rarnan system for ﬁeld applications working in the range of 3 to 25 cally relevant microorganisms, cyanobacteria and haloarchea, and com—
meters. The system consists of a compact Rarnan spectrometer illuminated paring that to the signal from macroscopic vegetation and abiotic min—
by a 532 nm Nd:YAG pulsed laser, which is coupled to a small telescope erals. With these laboratory measurements, we aim to understand
using optical ﬁbre. The detection is gated (ICCD camera) and the system whether Circular polarization offers the promise of a Viable rernote sens—
is fully computer controlled in its operation mode. Results obtained in the ing technique for the detection of life signatures and thereby develop
laboratory and in ﬁeld operations in Rio Tinto (Spain) andin the A1tic(Sval— a model for further exploration. By concentrating on photosynthesis
bard Islands) during AMASE 2007 expedition are presented and discussed. and phototrophy, we maximize observability from an astronomical per—

spective, since photosynthesis and phototrophy is typically a surface
. . . phenornenon requiring atmospheric transparency and high stellar flux.
2'16'1): Progress In Llfe Marker Chlp Technology for From a biological perspective, we maximize the likely polarization sig—
Detectlon 0f Llfe 011 Mars nal since Circular dichroism is greatest in the strong electronic transi—
tions that define photosynthetic absorption bands.
Mark Sims1 (rnrs@star.le.ac.uk), David Cullenz, Paul Wilson2,
Guus Borst3 Albert Prak4 Theo Veenstra4 Henk Leeuwis4 Lutz . . . . . .

. ’ . ’ ’ ’ 2-1-P.M1r rr Dlnerlr lanlrln n
R1chter5, Franco1s Gaubert6, Andrew Steele7, Mark Sephtong, AleX S 8 E 1c oat. ay es g 0 c 0b a 0 to g a d
Bakig, Judith Pillinger9 pace Xp 0” 1°“

1 ' ' L ' R ' K ' . . .
ZUnzverszty 0f. elcester, Spézce esearch Centre, Umtecit .mgdom, Verena Starke1 (vstarke@gl.c1w.edu), Sven B1lke2, L1sa Monaco3,

Cranﬁeld Umverszty, UK, Dutch Space, Netherlands, Llomx, The 3 . 4 1

5 6 7 . Jacobs Sverdrup , G1nger Flores , Andrew Steele
Netherlands, DLR, Germany, ESA, Netherlands, Carnegie 1 . . . . 2 .
. . . 8 . 9 Carnegie Institutlon 0f Washmgton, USA, Cancer Genetlcs
Institutlon of Washington, USA, Imperial College, UK, Open . . . .
University UK Branch, National Caner Instltute, National Institutes of Health,
’ USA, 3EST S Group, USA, 4NASA, USA
Detection of life on Mars or other astrobiology targets will rely on . . . . .
. . , . . M1croorgan1srns 1nterfere w1th, or are cruc1al to goals and systems
the detect1on of b1ornarkers. phys1cal or Chern1cal structures that can be . . . .
. . . . . . . . for space fl1ght. Consequently, the development of effect1ve rn1crob1al
assoc1ated w1th l1fe. A L1fe Marker Ch1p 1nstrurnent 1s be1ng developed . . . . . . . .
. . . . . rnon1tor1ng technolog1es 1s cr1t1cal for rn1ss1on safety and success. Rec—
by an 1nternat1onal consort1urn for operat1on on Mars and for other rn1s— . . . . . . . .

. . . . . ogn1z1ng the need for early m1crob1al1dent1ﬁcat1on, we developed rnol—
s1ons. Th1s 1nstrurnent uses 1rnrnuno—assay techn1ques to detect relevant . . . . .

. . . . . . ecular—based technolog1es for rn1crob1al rnon1tor1ng. Our group de—
rnolecular b1ornarkers. Th1s paper descr1bes the typ1cal targets 1t w1ll . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . s1gned a resequenc1ng nncroarray w1th Affymetr1x for the 1dent1ﬁcat1on
search for, 1ts operat1ng pr1nc1ple and the status of 1ts development. 63 . . . .

. . . . of nncroorgan1srns relevant to human space. In molecular b1ology, rn1—
b1ornarker targets have been 1dent1ﬁed and assays have been developed . . . . .

. . . . . . . croarrays have become an ub1qu1t0us tool, due to then potent1al to s1—
for a l1rn1ted subset. Assay sens1t1V1ty 1s typ1cally at the level of ppb to . . . . . . .
. . . . . rnultaneously 1nterrogate large quant1t1es of genet1c 1nforrnat1on 1n a
pprn depend1ng on the target. The detect1on 1s performed on s1l1con . . . . 16 18
. . . . . s1ngle exper1rnent. The custom array des1gn 1nterrogates S or S
wavegu1des where the b1nd1ng of target molecules 1s rneasured us1ng . .
. rRNA and rpoB (DNA—d1rected RNA polymerase subun1t) gene se—
fluorophores eXC1ted by a laser. Breadboard demonstrators have been . . . .

. . quences 1n 157 organ1srns, prob1ng 527829 base pans of sequence on

bu1lt of key components of the 1nstrurnent and results from these bread— . . . .
. . a s1ngle array. It 1ncludes gene sequences w1th potent1al relevance to
boards w1ll be presented, along w1th plans for future development. . . . .
spec1ﬁc areas of space explorat1on: pathogens, extremoph1les, and com—
mon microorganisms from the three domains of life bacteria, archaea,
and eukaryota. DNA is hybridized onto the array, and, depending on
the DNA present, Characteristic patterns of ﬂuorescent responses are
expected as a result. We have developed a novel algorithm for the Clas—
sification of microbes. We report three main findings: First, the
microarray was capable of identifying the sample organisms added to
the array. Second, MicroID can distinguish among species from the
same family. Third, we are currently using a base—pair distance tiling
array, but our results show that only 1 percent of random Chosen probes
of the current design are necessary for correct recognition. Therefore,
the Chip could be reduced in size or more organisms could be added.
300

"
"6","2-19-P. In Situ Assessment of Potential Biogenicity Using 2-20-P. Tunable Laser Spectrometer (TLS) for the
Image Analysis Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) Suite on the 2009 Mars
Science Laboratory (MSL) Mission
Kiri Wagstaff1 (kiri.wagstaff@jpl.nasa.gov), Frank Corsetti2
[Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA, 2University of Southern Christopher Webster1 (Chris.R.Webster@jpl.nasa.gov), Paul
California, USA Mahaffy2
[Jet Propulsion Laboratory, USA, 2NASA Goddard Space F light
Image analysis provides a fast, inexpensive, non—invasive way to rank Center, USA
samples according to their potential scientific value—a useful feature
in a data—rich environment. We describe a technique to Classify images The Tunable Laser Spectrometer (TLS) is one of three instruments
of rock samples as targets of interest with respect to biogenicity: are (QMS, GC, TLS) that make up the Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM)
the samples likely to contain evidence for life, or not? Using a data analytical chemistry lab on NASA’s 2009 Mars Science Laboratory
Cluster model constructed from terrestrial rock samples with known (MSL) rnission. TLS has unprecedented capability for measuring
properties, we analyzed the potential biogenicity of strornatolites found methane, water vapor, and carbon dioxide abundances in the martian
on Earth and several rocks imaged by the Mars Exploration Rovers. atmosphere and evolved from heated soil samples. In addition, TLS
Twelve properties directly measured from the digital images (gzip and will measure the 13C/12C isotope ratios in both CH4 and C02, and the
png compression ratios, entropy, energy ratio, and 8 Gray—Level Co— 160/170/180 isotope ratios in C02. Using an interband—cascade and a
occurrence Matrix features) were used in the data Cluster model based tunable diode laser, TLS is capable of determining atmospheric rnethane
on a suite of known rocks and minerals. Two macroscopically similar abundance to 2 percent accuracy and to a lower limit of 1 part—per—tril—
Earth strornatolites (laminated columnar branching structures), one of lion with SAM pre—Concentration. The instrument and test data results
known biogenic origin and the other of known abiotic origin, were Clas— are described.
sified using the Cluster analysis. All but one of the Mars samples were
Classified as abiotic. One sample (Humphrey) was flagged as rneriting
further observation and analysis; this rock was previously identified as
containing evidence of ancient ﬂowing water. While conclusive judg—
rnents about biogenicity are unlikely to be made solely on the basis of
image features, this analysis can provide a “first cut” estimate of the
importance of a follow—up search for other biosignatures (e.g., isotopic
or Chemical analysis). Given a ranked list of potential targets, rnore eX—
pensive analyses, in terms of integration time or consumables, can be
focused on targets with maximal potential interest.
301

"
