"","x"
"1","_ww.nature.com/scientificreports
OPEN ‘ Dysfunctional vestibular system
i causes a blood pressure drop in
g astronauts returnin from space
Received: 28 May 2015 i 9
Accepted: 03 November 2015 Emma Hallgrenl, Pierre-Frangois Migeottez, Ludmila Kornilova3, Quentin Deliérez,
Published: 16 December 2015 Erik Fransen"", Dmitrii Glukhikh3, Steven T. Moore5, Gilles Clément“, André Diedrich7,
5 Hamish MacDougall8 & Floris L. Wuyts1
It is a challenge for the human body to maintain stable blood pressure while standing. The body's
failure to do so can lead to dizziness or even fainting. For decades it has been postulated that the
vestibular organ can prevent a drop in pressure during a position change — supposedly mediated by
reﬂexes to the cardiovascular system. We show — for the ﬁrst time — a signiﬁcant correlation between
decreased functionality of the vestibular otolith system and a decrease in the mean arterial pressure
when a person stands up. Until now, no experiments on Earth could selectively suppress both otolith
systems; astronauts returning from space are a unique group of subjects in this regard. Their otolith
systems are being temporarily disturbed and at the same time they often suffer from blood pressure
instability. In our study, we observed the functioning of both the otolith and the cardiovascular
system of the astronauts before and after spaceﬂight. Our ﬁnding indicates that an intact otolith
system plays an important role in preventing blood pressure instability during orthostatic challenges.
Our ﬁnding not only has important implications for human space exploration; they may also improve
the treatment of unstable blood pressure here on Earth.
Movements and position changes are followed by a series of physiological changes in the human body.
5 One of them is the maintenance of stable blood pressure during a position change. However, its underly—
ing mechanism is still not fully understood. It is crucial to keep a suﬂicient blood ﬂow to the brain at all
5 times. The inability to do so is called Orthostatic Intolerance (01), Which causes a drop in blood pressure.
The main cause of orthostatic hypotension is today attributed to an excessive fall of cardiac output or a
5 defect vasoconstrictor mechanisml. Orthostatic intolerance can lead to dizziness and even evoke syn—
cope, that is, fainting. A blood pressure drop upon standing is typically linked to the dispensability of the
5 arteries in the lower limbs, as well as failure of the arteries to constrict timeously. Consequently, blood
pools in the lower parts of the body. Thus, the functional changes accompanying 01 can be understood
5 as a temporal mismatch between cardiac output and vascular resistancez. Conversely, a successful con—
striction leads to a redistribution of blood and an increase in blood pressure. The symptoms of 01 can
5 cause serious problems and have a strong impact on the quality of life of the affected person.
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS), Which is responsible for cardiac regulation, has been pointed
5 out as a key factor in blood pressure control“. During postural changes a range of feedback mechanisms
1Antwerp University Research center for Equilibrium and Aerospace, Dept. of Biomedical Physics, University of
Antwerp, Belgium. 2Université libre de Bruxelles & Erasmus Hospital, Department of Cardiology, Laboratory of
Physics and Physiology, Brussels, Belgium. 3 Laboratory ofVestibular Physiology, Institute of Biomedical Problems
5 ofthe Russian academy of sciences, Moscow, Russia. 4StatUa center for statistics, University ofAntwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium. 5Human Aerospace Laboratory, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, USA. 6Lyon
Neuroscience Research Center, IMPACT Team, University of Lyon, France. 7Autonomic Dysfunction Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, USA 8Sydney Human Factors Research, School of Psychology,
University of Sydney, Australia. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F.L.W. (email:
5 ﬂoris.wuyts@uantwerpen.be)
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS |5:17627|DOI:10.1038/srepl7627 1

"
"2","serve to increase ﬁring in the sympathetic nerves, which, among other effects, leads to an increased
blood pressure. One of the reﬂexes that contributes to these mechanisms is thought to originate in the
vestibular organs.

The vestibular organs, located in the inner ears, sense rotations by means of three semi—circular canals,
and they sense linear accelerations, including gravity, by means of the otoliths. Together with information
provided by the Visual and proprioceptive system, the vestibular organs ensure gaze stabilization and bal—
ance as well as orientation and navigation. This task is so fundamental to life on Earth that most animals
have a highly specialized vestibular system, the mammalian one being very similar across many species.

Early animal studies suggest that the vestibular system plays an important role in the activation of the
SNS3’5‘14. By selective natural and electrical vestibular stimulation, an increase of the activity in the SNS
and of the blood pressure has been measured. Those results strengthen the evidence for a presence of
a vestibulo—sympathetic reﬂex (VSR) in animals. This reﬂex links a stimulation of the vestibular system
with an activation of the cardiovascular system.

Vestibular signals have been shown to affect mainly the sympathetic outﬂow to the blood vessels.
In fact, all the activated nerves contain vasoconstrictor efferents15. The VSR is therefore thought to be
particularly important in the prevention of a drop in blood pressure and of OI because the VSR can be
elicited at the ﬁrst sensing of motion. The otoliths detect a position change with respect to gravity within
milliseconds and play a key role in the activation of the VSR. Altered sympathetic nerve activity has been
registered upon their stimulation with a short latency (660 ms), suggesting that this may be one of the
earliest mechanisms to sustain blood pressure upon standing up16’17. The latency in animals has been
shown to be as short as 50—100 Ins3. Based on the information from the otoliths, the activation of the SNS
increases pre—emptively before an actual drop in blood pressure is detected, constituting a feed—forward
mechanism. For instance, the baroreceptors are not activated until an actual blood pressure drop is meas—
ured in the carotid arteries. Hence, they initiate a feed—backward mechanism with a latency of 1.2—1.4 s”.

A few later studies show that the same theory might be applicable to humans3’5’16‘20. However, all the
studies on this phenomenon have so far focused on an activation of the otolithsl. None of these experi—
ments allows a selective suppression of the otolith reﬂex. Thus, little evidence eXists for a decreased VSR
in humans as a result of otolith deﬁciency. However, isolation of the otolith system is essential to studying
a hampered VSR. We aim to elucidate the VSR in the case of a so—called ‘deconditioned otolith system’,
which means that the functioning of the system is decreased. Such deconditioned otoliths can uniquely
be found in astronauts returning from a spaceﬂight.

A majority of the astronauts returning from a long—term exposure to microgravity suffer from OI
during the ﬁrst days after their return21’22. Since the beginning of manned spaceﬂight, symptoms such as
dizziness, postural control problems and even cases of syncope have been reported. It has been hypoth—
esized that the decreased cardiovascular response is due to the prolonged weightlessness experienced
during a spaceﬂight”, presumably caused by the adaptation of autonomic control and the deconditioning
of cardiac regulation mechanisms24’25. A number of countermeasures to ﬂuid shift and OI have been tried
out during the history of spaceﬂight26, but so far with little success for the returning space travellers
suffering from OI. In space, the cardiovascular system is no longer exposed to the transitions generated
by a position change, which stimulates the reﬂex needed to counteract gravity.

Similarly to the cardiovascular system, the otoliths are also forced, during spaceﬂight, to adapt to a
situation where there is no longer a preferred direction given by the acceleration of gravity”. For some
years now, it has been shown that the otolith system, due to the absence of perceived gravity, is sup—
pressed in returning astronauts”. In addition, results from the Neurolab shuttle mission demonstrated
that the otolith function was maintained during and after ﬂight in payload crewmembers exposed to
in—ﬂight 1—g centripetal acceleration during centrifugation (‘artiﬁcial gravity’). Non—centrifuged crew—
members however exhibited clear signs of OI, whereas astronauts exposed to ‘artiﬁcial gravity’ did not25.

In View of this phenomenon, we hypothesized that the otoliths play a key role in OI, affecting the astro—
nauts during their ﬁrst days after spaceﬂight. The goal of our study has been to investigate if a suppressed
otolith system affects the ability to regulate blood pressure upon standing, on return from space. In this
way we could study the link between the vestibular and the cardiovascular system to elucidate the VSR.

In order to study the VSR, we needed to evaluate brainstem—mediated reﬂexes that were based
on information from the vestibular system, in particular ocular counter—rolling (OCR). OCR is an
otolith—mediated reﬂex that serves as a compensatory eye movement. It is generated when we tilt our
head sideways (head changes with respect to the gravitational vector), turn around a corner or undergo
off—aXis centrifugation28. During centrifugation, the otolith system perceives a tilt caused by the combi—
nation of centripetal forces and gravity and therefore generates OCR.

Similarly, the cardiovascular system can be quantiﬁed by speciﬁc parameters. Mean arterial pressure (MAP)
is one of the most important parameters resulting from the cardiac and cardiovascular control mechanisms.
Indeed, MAP is considered to be the perfusion pressure seen by the organs and is directly inﬂuenced by
stroke volume (SV), heart rate (HR), systemic vascular resistance (SVR) and central venous pressure (CVP):

MAP 2 (SV >I< HR >I< SVR) + CVP (1)

As a result, MAP can be considered the output of the overall cardiovascular system. The goal is to

maintain an appropriate perfusion of all organs Via action on the cardiac function (HR, SV) and the
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5:17627 | DOI: 10.1038/srepl7627 2

"
"3","GIA Ag
\ .
r g "" W.“ l; -- \N\\“\:A‘C‘$.__
_ j "" ik‘ iiiw—J I ,
“l? l: WK. ”‘99) 75 i g
='I IIII'r If»!
.f'. fmw .
_-
Figure 1. VVIS chair. The drawing shows a model of the centrifuge we used to induce OCR. During off-
axes centrifugation, the net linear acceleration stimulating the otoliths is the (vector) sum (GIA) of the
centripetal force and gravity. (See vectors in the ﬁgure) The GIA will be interpreted as the vertical, with the
consequence that the subject experiences a sensation of tilt. The OCR, a torsion of the eye, was recorded
using three-dimensional infrared Video-oculography. As a second step we analysed the recording of the eye
movement for every experiment to calculate the OCR in degrees.
vascular system (SVR, CVP). However, HR and heart rate variability (HRV) are also markers of the
autonomic control of the cardiovascular system.

Our primary outcomes in this study are the values of the OCR, the MAP and their correlation.
Methodology
We conducted our experiments in the Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre (Star City) near Moscow,
Russia. A group of 12 male (47+/—5 years, 78.3—|—/—5.8kg, 179.3—|—/—4.0 cm) cosmonauts from the
Russian Space Agency (Roscosmos) and one from European Space Agency (ESA) (all denoted as
astronauts) took part in the study. The astronauts were tested before and after a 6-month stay in the
International Space Station (188). The preﬂight data were based on two baseline experiments that were
conducted on average 66 (SD: 26) days before launch. The postﬂight data consist of one experiment
performed in the early days (3.8, SD = 1.7 days) after return back to earth, and another experiment per-
formed 9—10 days (9.6, SD = 0.51) after return. The two experiments will be denoted as “early postﬂight”
and “late postﬂight”. Due to medical and administrative issues we were not able to test all the astronauts
on the same day after return.

To quantify the effect of microgravity on the vestibular otolith system and on the cardiovascular
system respectively, two separate tests were performed. During the ﬁrst test the astronaut was subjected
to centrifugation to induce the otolith parameter Ocular Counter-Rolling (OCR). Similarly to eliciting
an otolith reﬂex by centrifugation, the cardiovascular system control mechanism can be elicited by an
operational tilt test. The second test was meant to put the cardiovascular system under orthostatic stress
and evaluate its reaction. The responses evaluated were MAP, HR and HRV. Moreover, the autonomic
control of the HR and the reactivity of the cardiovascular system were evaluated with the analysis of
total power of HRV, as well as LF (low frequency) and HF (high frequency) components separately. The
latter is also known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), a marker of vagal modulation of HR. The
RR—interval (RRI), used in HRV computation, was also computed as:

RRI : ﬂ
HR (2)

As RRI is used for the analysis of HRV”, RRI is presented instead of HR in the ﬁgures. However for
the argumentation and discussion we still make use of the more standard HR.

SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5:17627 | DOI: 10.1038/Srepl7627 3

"
"4","VVIS — evaluation of the otolith system. During the ﬁrst experiment, the astronaut was installed
in the Visual and Vestibular Investigation System (VVIS), a small centrifuge (rotation chair, see Fig. 1)
build for the Neurolab shuttle mission. The astronaut was securely ﬁxed in the chair and head movements
were restricted. The entire room was darkened to avoid Visual motion feedback during rotation. The
centrifuge allowed earth vertical rotation on a ﬁxed distance of 0.5 m from the axes of rotation. In front
of the astronaut a screen was placed on which Visual targets were present during parts of the experiments.
After calibration of the Video—goggles and a recording of a baseline the astronaut was subjected to the 1g
for 5 minutes in counter clockwise (CCW) and 5 minutes in clockwise (CW) direction. The subject was
always facing the direction of motion. Right—ear out (REO) during CCW rotation and left—ear out (LEO)
during CW The maximum velocity of 254o/s was chosen to obtain a centripetal acceleration of 1g out—
wards. Combined with gravity, such a shear force constitutes a Virtual sideways tilt of 45 degrees, induc—
ing an OCR of typically a couple of degrees.

Measurements of the OCR were taken before and during rotation according to the protocol. The ﬁrst
measurement was taken during stand still, the second one was taken 40 seconds after the stable phase of
rotation was reached. The 40 seconds of delay was implemented to allow the cupola of the horizontal
semi circular canal to return to its original position, to make sure that the measured OCR was based on
contribution of the otolith system only. The difference in OCR between stand still and rotation was
deﬁned as the OCR value, AOCRpreﬂight. The preﬂight data was compared with the OCR recorded during
the early postﬂight experiment, the AOCRpostﬂight. The difference in OCR (AOCR), a comparison between
pre— and postﬂight, gave us an indication of the inﬂuence of microgravity on the otoliths.

Measurements of the OCR give a reliable estimate of the otolith function25 and are typically done using
three—dimensional infrared Video—oculography30. The Videos containing recordings of the eye movements
were analyzed to calculate the torsion of the eyes, e.g. the OCR. To do this we run the ﬁles in a Visual
programming language. The program we used was custom made in National Instruments LabVIEW by
one of the co—authors. Further statistical analyses were made in PASW Statistics (SPSS Software®, SPSS).
Operational tilt-test —eva|uation of the cardiovascular system. Right after the centrifugation
we performed the second test, an operational tilt test, to study the cardiovascular system. Similar to
provoking an otolith reﬂex by centrifugation, the cardiovascular system can be provoked by an opera—
tional tilt test. The response of the cardiovascular system was quantiﬁed with the following parameters
HR, HRV, HF and MAP. During such a test the subject is exposed to orthostatic stress by inducing a
passive change of position. The subject is initially positioned horizontally on the table, at one point the
table is tilted to place the subject in a passive upright position. This causes concomitant orthostatic stress,
high enough to create a risk of fainting. Essential during such a test is that the subject passively under—
goes the position change, and no muscle pumps are involved to actively regulate blood pressure changes.
The subject was tested in supine position (laying down) before putting the table in an upright position
for the second measurement in standing position. In the same way as when analysing the OCR, we
compared the preﬂight data for the cardiac and blood pressure control with the postﬂight data.
Measurements were performed during a 60 seconds long recording. For supine position the measurement
took place between the 4th and 5th minute of the protocol and for the upright position between the 9th
and 10th minute during a passive tilt of 60 degrees. The difference between cardiac and blood pressure
control during standing and supine position, as well between pre— and post—ﬂight, served as a measure—
ment of the cardiovascular function, the so—called AMAP, AHR, AHF, and AHRV. In this way we
obtained, for each subject, a speciﬁc measure of the otolith function and of the cardiovascular function.
For the analyses of the cardiovascular parameters, a Matlab program tailored to the needs of those exper—
iments by one of the co—authors was used.

Statistics. By comparing the OCR before and after spaceﬂight, we could study the effect of prolonged
microgravity on the otolith system. Similarly, we could estimate the impact of prolonged microgravity
on the cardiovascular system by assessing the reaction to the standing position. The ﬁnal step was to
check for correlation between the AOCR and the cardiovascular parameters (AMAP, AHR, AHF, and
AHRV). In this way we would know if there was a link between the change in otolith function and a
change in the ability to control the blood pressure during a position change. Before performing any
further analyses we used the Kolrnogorov—Smirnov test in SPSS to test the normality of the two variables
tested for correlation. In both cases the variables were normally distributed (p: 0.2). To check for cor—
relation a Pearson correlation test was performed (in SPSS) between the OCR and the cardiovascular
parameters. Using the pwr package in R, we calculated the samples sizes required to have an 80% power
to detect moderate to high correlation coeﬂicients. The current sample size (12 individuals), holds 80%
power to detect a Pearson correlation coeﬂicient of 0.72.
Results
Our current study on astronauts who spent siX months in space, offered a unique opportunity to inves—
tigate the impact of a deconditioned otolith system on blood pressure and cardiac autonomic control.
In addition, it allowed us to study a temporarily hampered VSR in humans in an unprecedented way.
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS |5:17627| DOI:10.1038/srepl7627 4

"
"5","Eﬁ
g w 0
E O
£3 5 O 0
go IS 0 09""]: O '
Em O o
g ‘15 ,, O__
E .20 '6
Q 45 ﬂ.
Descrease of OCRZpost-ﬂight vs ple—ﬂight (Degre:s)
Figure 2. Correlation between OCR and MAP. The ﬁgure shows for each one of the 12 individuals the
change in OCR (X-aXis) and the change in MAP (y—aXis). The change in OCR and MAP reﬂects the effect of
long-term exposure of microgravity on the vestibular and the cardiovascular system. A statistical signiﬁcant
correlation between the OCR and MAP (r: 0.67, p: 0.018) was found. An individual with a decrease in
OCR on return was also more likely to have a decrease in MAP (while standing). The same was true for
the reverse; an astronaut with a fairly intact otolith reﬂeX better could maintain his blood pressure upon
standing. This indicates that an individual with a decreased otolith function is also more likely to have a
diﬂiculty to maintain blood pressure while standing.
4 88 l } 5 1 s W
a 3 BDC n+2 n+5 mm b 86 BDC n+2 n+5 mm C 4 BMm
Figure 3. Recovery of (a) OCR, (b) MAP and (c) OCR per individual upon return. The ﬁgure shows the
average OCR (a) and MAP (b) for the 12 subjects before and after a 6-month spaceﬂight. c shows the OCR
recovery per individual. On the X-aXis the experiments, BDC (baseline, measured before ﬂight), R+ 2, R+ 5
and R+ 10 are indicated. (Return + “the number of days after return the experiment was performed”). The
y-aXis shows the OCR in degrees and MAP in mmHg. Triangular data points represent data collected during
standing position and the circular data points represents the supine position. Both variables, OCR and MAP,
were signiﬁcantly decreased after spaceﬂight (* indicates a signiﬁcance of P g 0.05). On the last experiment
day (R+ 10), they were both back at the same level as before ﬂight (BDC), indicating a full recovery from
the microgravity effect. The individual differences in OCR is in general rather big, in ﬁgure c the OCR is
displayed individually for our 12 subjects. The individual decrease in response after spaceﬂight is clearer in c.
Comparison of pairwise preﬂight data with postﬂight data, for each astronaut individually, resulted
in a statistically signiﬁcant decrease of AOCR (p = 0.00076). This result agrees with earlier studies show—
ing a decreased OCR on return after spaceﬂight31‘34. More importantly, for the early postﬂight experi—
ment there was a signiﬁcant correlation between the AOCR, and a reduced blood pressure response;
AMAP (r: 0.67, p : 0.018). (Fig. 2) MAP is represented as the average of 2/3 DBP —|— 1/3 SBP. We found
that individuals with a decreased otolith function also had a reduced cardiovascular function on their
return to Earth. Conversely, astronauts whose otolith function seemed unaffected by spaceﬂight also had
a low or no decrease of their blood pressure control function. Hence, we demonstrate a signiﬁcant
one—to—one relationship between the otolith reﬂex OCR and the MAP. In addition, both OCR and MAP
were back at baseline level at the late postﬂight experiment (R—I— 10). (Fig. 3) In all the diagrams present—
ing cardiovascular data, the triangular data points represent data collected during standing position and
circular data points represent data collected during supine position.
Further on, the HR (presented as RRI), HF and the total power of HRV (Fig. 4), did not show such
a correlation with the OCR. Additionally, the HR and HF remained decreased late postﬂight (p < 0.05),
while this was not the case for MAP. Again, MAP was back at preﬂight level at the late postﬂight
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5:17627 | DOI: 10.1038/srep17627 5

"
"6","www.nature.com/scientificreports/

0.85 i 0.02 ' {i { I o

0.75 {u {‘u E... 0 } _0.1
a 0‘7 BDC n+2 n+5 R+10 b ‘0‘01 BDC R+2 R+5 R+10 c ‘0‘15 BDC n+2 n+5 mm
Figure 4. Recovery of (a) HR (RRI), (b) HF and (c) HRV upon return. The ﬁgure shows the results for the
three parameters: HR (a), HF (b), and the total power of HRV (c) for the 12 subjects. On the X- aXis the
experiments, BDC (baseline measured before ﬂight), R+ 2, R+ 5 and R+ 10 are indicated. (Return + “the
number of days after return the experiment was performed”). The y— aXis shows for the three parameters: a;
HR (RRI) in seconds (s), b; HF in seconds (s) and c; HRV in seconds (s). Triangular data points represent
data collected during standing position and the circular data points represents the supine position. None
of the three parameters did show a correlation with the OCR. Additionally, the HR and HF remained
decreased late postﬂight (*p g 0.05, “p g 0.01 and ”*1: g 0.001) for the standing posture. Furthermore, there
was no recovery back to the preﬂight level during the ﬁrst 10 days after return, while this was the case for
OCR and MAP. No signiﬁcant changes were observed in the supine posture for those parameters.

48

47 } %

46 } T

45
Ia 44
e
E
g 43
E *
n. 42
m

41

40

39

38 BDC R+2 R+5 R+1O
Figure 5. The eifect of spaceﬂight on pulse pressure control. The ﬁgure shows the results for the blood
pressure control for the 12 subjects. On the X-aXis the experiments, BDC (baseline measured before ﬂight),
R+ 2, R+ 5 and R+ 10 are indicated. (Return + “the number of days after return the experiment was
performed”). The y-aXis shows for the pulse pressure values in (mmHg). Triangular data points represent
data collected during standing position and the circular data points represents the supine position. Pulse
pressure was signiﬁcantly decreased on R+ 5 (*p g 0.05). On R+ 10, it was back at the same level as before
ﬂight (BDC), indicating a full recovery from the microgravity effect, just as for OCR. No signiﬁcant changes
were observed in the supine posture. A decrease was observed on R+ 2, but no signiﬁcance was found due
to the low number of subject tested that day (n = 5).
experiment, just as the OCR. The two correlated parameters showed a similar pattern of alteration and
recovery. (Figure 3)

Pulse pressure was signiﬁcantly decreased (p < 0.05) on the second experiment after spaceﬂight. On
late postﬂight it was back at the same level as before ﬂight (BDC), indicating a full recovery from the
microgravity effect, just as OCR. No signiﬁcant changes were observed in the supine posture. A decrease
is observed on the ﬁrst experiment after spaceﬂight (R—I— 2), but not signiﬁcant due to the low number
of subject tested that day (n: 5) (Fig. 5).

Discussion and Conclusion

We have investigated what the effect is of a defect otolith system on the ability to regulate blood pres—

sure during a position change. Our goal has been to elucidate a hampered VSR, the link between the

vestibular and cardiovascular system. That it is a suppression of the otolith inputs to the brain instead

of a stimulation of the activity has been the key to our study. Other studies have so far, only pointed
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 5:17627 | DOI: 10.1038/srep17627 6

"
"7","toward an increase of the VSR during stimulation, instead of evaluating the effect of a suppression of
the vestibular system. To the best of our knowledge, this is the closest anyone has come so far to show a
relation between a suppression of the otolith response and a parallel decrease of blood pressure control
in humans. We are conVinced that this is a unique dataset revealing the link between the otoliths and
blood pressure control mechanisms. A correlation by itself is not the shear proof of causality but together
with the rest of our ﬁndings it strongly suggest that there is one. In addition, our conclusion is also based
on results from earlier research studies showing that a defect otolith system could affect the ability to
control the blood pressure3.

A decreased OCR and a depression of all blood pressure and cardiac control parameters were observed
during the ﬁrst days after return from space. After ten days the OCR was back at the same level as before
ﬂight. This indicates that the otolith deﬁciency is temporary. The MAP showed the same type of recovery
as the OCR (Fig. 3) after return, while on the contrary, HR and HF remained depressed. Neither were
they signiﬁcantly correlated with OCR at the ﬁrst place. For those parameters (HR and HF) we saw that
their response to orthostatic challenge remained low for all of the experiments after spaceﬂight, which
means that on the late postﬂight experiment we still measured lower values than before ﬂight. The values
were not much different late postﬂight compared to the early postﬂight recording session. This indicates
an independence from the vestibular activation. These ﬁndings raise eVidence for a link between the
otolith system and the BP regulation, namely the VSR. At the same time, most of the returning astronauts
report that symptoms like dizziness and balance problems ease after a couple of days after return, which
also indicating a relatively fast recovery. While this is not the case for cardiac autonomic control (HR
and HF) which remains depressed but is not associated with the dizziness symptoms.

A decrease in pulse pressure could theoretically be the cause of a lower stimulation of the barore—
ceptors. This could in turn induce a sympathetic activation (which is what we observe), and therefore end
in a better blood pressure control (maintenance of MAP). However, to explain the observed decreased
MAP control, the pulse pressure data should then demonstrate an increased pulse pressure after space—
ﬂight. An increased pulse pressure could elicit a peripheral vasodilatation, responsible for the observed
decrease in MAP. But this is not what we found. On the contrary, we measured a decrease in pulse pres—
sure after spaceﬂight, something that is very unlikely to explain the decreased MAP on return.

As the standing values were taken 10 minutes after the tilt, we can stress the eVidence that a sympa—
thetic activation, on early postﬂight, was not able to counteract the decrease in MAP. MAP still remained
lower than normal. However, late postﬂight, we observed a similar sympathetic activation as early post—
ﬂight (similar decrease in HR and in HF) but MAP returned back to normal. For the OCR we saw the
same recovery pattern as for the MAP, a full recovery at late postﬂight. Therefore our data suggest that
the return back to normal values of blood pressure control is to due the VSR. Rather than due to the
central autonomic control of the cardiovascular system, which remains under a high sympathetic acti—
vation. We speculate that, when the otolith function returns back to normal, the VSR helps preventing a
blood pressure drop that the activation of the sympathetic system can not do alone.

The ﬁnding that a decreased ability to maintain blood pressure upon standing is correlated with a
decreased otolith response do not only has important implications for human space exploration. The
acquired knowledge possibly suggests looking at 01 problems also from a vestibular point of View.
Currently, the cardiovascular clinical approach to 01 does not consider a vestibular component, but
this is understandable since only recently the evaluation of the otolith system has become more readily
available to the clinicians. Nevertheless, for the future, we anticipate that the current ﬁndings may spur
interdisciplinary research regarding a vestibulo—sympathetic reﬂeX. Besides these important applications,
we consider our ﬁnds to be of fundamental scientiﬁc interest, since they strengthens the eVidence of a
fundamental physiological otolith—sympathetic reﬂeX (VSR) in humans.

All participants provided written informed consent prior to their participation. The study protocol
was designed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of the BSA and the Antwerp University Hospital.

References

1. Freeman, R. et al. Consensus statement on the deﬁnition of orthostatic hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the postural
tachycardia syndrome. Clin. Auton. Res. 21, 69—72 (2011).

2. Wieling, W, Krediet, C. T. P., van Dijk, N., Linzer, M. & Tschakovsky, M. E. Initial orthostatic hypotension: review of a forgotten
condition. Clin. Sci. (Land). 112, 157—165 (2007).

3. Yates, B. 1., Bolton, P. S. & Maceﬁeld, V. G. Vestibulo-sympathetic responses. Compr. Physiol. 4, 851—887 (2014).

4. Abboud, F. M. & Thames, M. Interaction of cardiovascular reﬂexes in circulatory control. In Shepherd I. T., Abboud F. M. editors.
Handbook of Physiology Section 2: Circulation Volume III: Peripheral Circulation and Organ Blood Flow, Part 2. (Bethesa, MD:
American Physiological Society, 1983).

5. Yates, B. I. Vestibular inﬂuences on the autonomic nervous system. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 781, 458—473 (1996).

6. Ishikawa, T. & Miyazawa, T. Sympathetic responses evoked by vestibular stimulation and their interactions with somato-
sympathetic reﬂexes. I Aut. Nerv Syst 1, 243—254 (1980).

7. Uchino, Y., Kudo, N., Tsuda, K. & lwamura, Y. Vestibular inhibition of sympathetic nerve activities. Brain Res. 22, 195—206 (1970).

8. Kerman, I. A. & Yates, B. J. Regional and functional differences in the distribution of vestibulosympathetic reﬂexes. Am. I. Physiol.
275, R824—R835 (1998).

9. Yates, B. 1., Yamagata, Y. & Bolton, P. S. The ventrolateral medulla of the cat mediates vestibulosympathetic reﬂexes. Brain Res.
552, 265—272 (1991).

SCIENTIFIC REPORTS |5:17627|DOI:10.1038/srepl7627 7

"
"8","www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10. Yates, B. 1. & Miller, A. D. Physiological evidence that the vestibular system participates in autonomic and respiratory control. I
Vestib Res 8, 17—25 (1998).
11. Yates, B. 1. & Miller, A. D. Properties of sympathetic reﬂexes elicited by natural vestibular stimulation: implications for
cardiovascular control. I. Neurophysiol. 71, 2087—92 (1994).
12. Yates, B. 1., 1akus, 1. & Miller, A. D. Vestibular effects on respiratory outﬂow in the decerebrate cat. Brain Res. 629, 209—217 (1993).
13. 1ian, B. 1., Cotter, L. A., Emanuel, B. A., Cass, S. P. & Yates, B. 1. Effects of bilateral vestibular lesions on orthostatic tolerance in
awake cats. 1. Appl. Physiol. 86, 1552—1560 (1999).
14. Cohen, B. et al. Sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) induces a vasovagal response in the rat. Exp. Brain Res. 210,
45—55 (2011).
15. Tang, P. C. & Gernandt, B. E. Autonomic responses to vestibular stimulation. Exp. Neurol. 24, 558—578 (1969).
16. Kaufmann, H. et al. Vestibular control of sympathetic activity: An otolith-sympathetic reﬂex in humans. Exp. Brain Res. 143,
463—469 (2002).
17. Voustianiouk, A. et al. Electrical activation of the human vestibulo-sympathetic reﬂex. Exp. Brain Res. 171, 251—261 (2006).
18. Ray, C. A. Interaction of the vestibular system and baroreﬂexes on sympathetic nerve activity in humans. Am. I. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 279, (2000).
19. Essandoh, L. K., Duprez, D. A. & Shepherd, 1. T. Reﬂex constriction of human limb resistance vessels to head-down neck ﬂexion.
1. Appl. Physiol. 64, 767—70 (1988).
20. Mandsager, K. T., Robertson, D. & Diedrich, A. The function of the autonomic nervous system during spaceﬂight. Clin. Auton.
Res. 25, 141—151 (2015).
21. Buckey, 1. C. et al. Orthostatic intolerance after spaceﬂight. 1. Appl. Physiol. 81, 7—18 (1996).
22. Yates, B. 1. & Kerman, I. A. Post-spaceﬂight orthostatic intolerance: possible relationship to microgravity-induced plasticity in
the vestibular system. Brain Res. Rev. 28, 73—82 (1998).
23. Fritsch-Yelle, 1. M., Whitson, P. A., Bondar, R. L. & Brown, T. E. Subnormal norepinephrine release relates to presyncope in
astronauts after spaceﬂight. 1. Appl. Physiol. 81, (1996).
24. Migeotte, P., Prisk, G. K. & Paiva, M. Microgravity alters respiratory sinus arrhythmia and short-term heart rate variability in
humans. Am. I. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 284, (2003).
25. Moore, S. T. et al. Artiﬁcial gravity: A possible countermeasure for post-ﬂight orthostatic intolerance. Acta Astronaut. 56,
867—876 (2005).
26. Campbell, M. R. & Charles, 1. B. Historical Review of Lower Body Negative Pressure Research in Space Medicine. Aerosp. Med.
Hum. Perform. 86, 633—640 (2015).
27. Clarke, A. H., Grigull, 1., Mueller, R. & Scherer, H. The three-dimensional vestibulo-ocular reﬂex during prolonged microgravity.
Exp. Brain Res. 134, 322—334 (2000).
28. Buytaert, K. I. et al. A new model for utricular function testing using a sinusoidal translation proﬁle during unilateral
centrifugation. Audiol. Neurotol. 15, 343—352 (2010).
29. Taskforce. Heart rate variability Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use. Task Force of the European
Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Eur. Heart I. 17, 354—81 (1996).
30. Moore, S. T., Haslwanter, T., Curthoys, I. S. & Smith, S. T. A Geometric Basis for Measurement of 3-Dimensional Eye Position
Using lmage-Processing. Vis. Res. 36, 445—459 (1996).
31. Moore, S. T., Clement, G., Raphan, T. & Cohen, B. Ocular counterrolling induced by centrifugation during orbital space ﬂight.
Exp. Brain Res. 137, 323—335 (2001).
32. Dai, M., McGarVie, L., Kozlovskaya, 1., Raphan, T. & Cohen, B. Effects of spaceﬂight on ocular counterrolling and the spatial
orientation of the vestibular system. Exp. Brain Res. 102, 45—56 (1994).
33. Young, L. R. & Sinha, P. Spaceﬂight inﬂuences on ocular counterrolling and other neurovestibular reactions. Otolaryngol. Head.
Neck Surg. 118, 831—834 (1998).
34. Diamond, S. G. & Markham, C. H. Changes in gravitational state cause changes in ocular torsion. I. Gravit. Physiol. 5, P109—P1 10
(1998).
Acknowledgements
This study is funded by the European Space Agency (ESA), the Russian Federal Space Agency (RosCosmos),
Belgian Science Policy (ProdeX), University of Antwerp and the Russian Academy of Sciences Institute of
Biomedical Problems (IBMP). We would also like to thank all participating crewmembers.
Author Contributions
E.H. performed the experiments, carried out statistical analyses and wrote the main text. P.—F.M. and
Q.D. performed the experiments and carried it out statistical analyses. L.K. designed and planned
the experiments. D.G. performed the experiments. E.F. performed statistical analyses. S.M., GO and
AD. designed and performed the experiment. H.M. constructed part of the equipment and performed
the experiment. EW performed the experiment, directed and coordinated the research. All authors
contributed to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
How to cite this article: Hallgren, E. et al. Dysfunctional vestibular system causes a blood pressure
drop in astronauts returning from space. Sci. Rep. 5, 17627; doi: 10.1038/srep17627 (2015).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The
BY images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Com—
mons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the
Creative Commons license, users Will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce
the material. To View a copy of this license, Visit http://creativecommons.0rg/licenses/by/4.0/
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS |5:17627|DOI:10.1038/srepl7627 8

"
