"","x"
"1","Wt Current 5 cholo letters
(Bil. Fsyuhuluﬂ
[Em
[a h L l _ H V01. 24, Issue 1, 2008 (2008)
I l'l' uur- II III 1:-|:llltulr||_i .
______________________________________ Varla
Romaric Marcilly and Marion Luyat
The role of eye height in judgment
ba rri e r
Warning
The contents of this site is subject to the French law on intellectual property and is the exclusive property of the
pubHshen
The works on this site can be accessed and reproduced on paper or digital media, provided that they are strictly used
for personal, scientific or educational purposes excluding any commercial exploitation. Reproduction must necessarily
mention the editor, the journal name, the author and the document reference.
Any other reproduction is strictly forbidden without permission of the publisher, except in cases provided by legislation
in force in France.
revues.org
Revuesorg is a platform forjournals in the humanites and social sciences run by the CLEO, Centre for open electronic
publishing (CNRS, EHESS, UP, UAPV).
Electronic reference
Romaric Marcilly and Marion Luyat, << The role of eye height in judgment of an affordance of passage under a
barrier >>, Current psychology letters [Online], Vol. 24, Issue 1, 2008 | 2008, online since 15 mars 2008, connection
on 11 octobre 2012. URL : /index3443.htm|
Publisher: Centre PsyCLE
http://cp|.revues.org
http://www.revues.org
Document available online on: /index3443.htm|
This PDF document was generated by the journal.
© All rights reserved

"
"2","To quote this document:
Romaric Marcilly and Marion Luyat, « The role of eye height in judgment of
CMMWLOM an affordance of passage under a barrier», in Current Psychology Letters, Vol.
Behavlour-BralnctCoenItlon 24, Issue 1, 2008 [Online], pages 12-24, published on line on : march, 27
2008. URL :http://cp|.revues.org/document3443.htm|.
THE ROLE OF EYE HEIGHT IN JUDGMENT OF AN AFFORDANCE OF
PASSAGE UNDER A BARRIER
O
Romaric Marcilly Marion Luyat
Laboratory of Industrial and Human
Automatic, Mechanic and Informatics, Laboratory of Functional Neurosciences
CNRS UMR 8530 and Pathology, CNRS UMR 8160 and
University Of Valenciennes and 0f University of Lille - CHRU 59037 Lille
Hainaut-Cambrésis, Ie Mont Houy-59313
Valenciennes Cedex 9
E-mail: romaric.marci|ly@univ-
valenciennes.fr

"
"3","CPL - 24(1) - 2008

Résumé

D’apres |a théorie écologique de la perception (Gibson, 1979), I’observateur-acteur, au coeur
de ses multiples interactions avec |’environnement, pergoit des affordances, c’est-a-dire des
opportunités d’action. Cette perception serait directe et nécessiterait |a prise d’information qui
spécifierait |a relation entre |es caractéristiques de |’environnement et |es propriétés de |’individu.
L’objectif de cette recherche est d’étudier |e réle de la hauteur des yeux dans des jugements
perceptifs de passage sous une barre. Huit participants ont effectué des jugements verbaux a propos
de la hauteur minimale d’une barre sous Iaquelle i|s pouvaient passer sans baisser |a téte en marchant
a vitesse normale. La hauteur des yeux pergue était également mesurée. Les jugements étaient
effectués dans trois conditions de vision: (i) utilisation de lunettes a verres neutres (condition de
base), (ii) utilisation de lunettes avec verre prismatique (deviation vers |e bas de 20 dp) et (iii) apres
adaptation a ces lunettes. Les résultats montrent que |es deux types de jugements (hauteur minimale
et hauteur des yeux pergue) sont affectés par |e port des prismes. ||s revelent notamment un effet de
|’adaptation aux prismes (after-effect) significatif. Cet after-effect est mis en evidence pour |es deux
types de jugements. Ces résultats étayent |’hypothese selon Iaquelle |a hauteur des yeux effective,
souple et adaptable, est calibrée par rapport a la scene visuelle. En retour, |a hauteur des yeux
effective peut servir a estimer des potentialités d’action pour I’organisme.

Abstract

According to the ecological theory of visual perception (Gibson, 1979), the perceiver-actor
perceives affordances (i.e. opportunities of action) through multiple interactions with the
environment. This perception is direct and consists in picking up information that specifies the
relationship between the environment's characteristics and the perceiver-actor's properties. The aim
of the work reported here was to study the role of eye height in the perceptual judgments of
passability under a barrier. Eight participants were asked to verbally judge the minimal height of a
barrier under which they could pass without lowering their head. Their perceived eye height was also
measured. The judgments were made in three viewing conditions: (i) wearing neutral glasses (the
baseline condition), (ii) immediately after putting on glasses with prismatic deviation (a 20PD
downward deviation) and (iii) after adaptation to the prismatic deviation. The results showed that the
two judgments (minimal barrier height and perceived eye height) were affected in the same way by
the prisms. Most significantly, an after-effect occurred and had a similar impact on the two
judgments. These results suggest that the effective eye height is not fixed but can be adapted and
calibrated relative to the visual array. Accordingly, effective eye height can help estimate action
potentialities for the organism.

Key-words: affordance; eye-height ratio; perception; prismatic deviation; passability

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was carried out under the auspices of the GDRE’s ”HumAn-Machine Systems in
Transportation — HAMASYT” program

13

"
"4","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
INTRODUCTION

Through our various interactions with our environment, we generally guide our actions in an
appropriate manner and achieve our goals without injuring ourselves. During locomotion,
for example, we select the ground areas that support our weight and avoid inappropriate
surfaces and obstacles that could potentially prevent or hinder movement. Likewise, we
adjust our walking speed to suit the nature of the terrain, by slowing down when the ground
is rough and accelerating when conditions are more favorable. The affordance neologism
(introduced by James Jerome Gibson in 1979) illustrates very well this ability to guide our
behavior by perceiving what the environment offers us in terms of action opportunities.
Affordance can be defined as the functional utility of an object, a surface or an event for an
animal with given physical characteristics (height, weight, etc.) and a number of action
capabilities which depend on the species, the animal's ontogenetic development and/or
more idiosyncratic characteristics (Regia Corte, Luyat, Miossec & Darcheville, 2004). In the
literature, recent debate has centered on the ontology of affordance (for a review, see Luyat
& Regia-Corte, in press). Researchers argue over whether the affordance is an inherent
property of the environment (Turvey, 1992) or an emergent property of the animal-
environment system (Stoffregen, 2003). However, in both of these theoretical views, the
notion of affordance relies on the fact that the environmental properties (height, width,
weight, distance, etc.) are not evaluated on an extrinsic scale with the units of measurement
used in physics. In fact, the dimensions are measured on an intrinsic scale according to
certain relevant properties of the perceiver-actor, such as its own height, width and running
speed (Oudejans, Michaels, Bakker & Dolné, 1996).

For example, in Warren’s pioneering study (1984), tall and short participants were asked to
view a set of stairs with different riser heights and then, without performing the real action,
had to judge whether they could climb the various stairs with a normal bipedal stance. The
results revealed that whatever the participant's height, perceptual judgments of the critical
riser height could be expressed as a constant proportion of the participant's leg length
(observed nc20.88) This fitted well with the individual's actual stair-climbing capabilities
computed from an a priori biomechanical model of climbability, where TCC= 0.88. This critical
pi number (rt c: E/A) is an invariant ratio obtained by dividing the characteristics of the
environment (E: critical riser height) by the relevant property of the individual (A: leg
length). In the context of direct perception, perceiving the affordance of climbing would
mean detecting this rt -number (i.e. the information specifying that we are able to climb a
stair) in the stimulation pattern. The ratio relative to the eye height of the perceiver-actor is
a potential candidate for specifying such an affordance.

The concept of eye height can be used in several ways. Real eye height refers to the actual
height of an observer’s gaze off the level floor (anthropometrical standing eye height).
Effective eye height (see Wraga, 1999) refers to the projection of the observer’s eye height
into the environment. The effective eye height can be used to measure the dimensions of an
object, as long as the perceiver-actor and the perceived object are on the same plane.
Moreover, the perceived eye height is the estimate of the effective eye height by a
perceiver-actor. In an open visual field, effective eye height is redundant to the explicit
visual horizon, which is the apparent intersection of the earth and sky. However, under

14

"
"5","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
many circumstances (e.g. an indoor environment), the explicit horizon is not directly
available. In such cases, the effective eye height relies on an approximation of the horizon:
the implicit horizon. The latter is conveyed by information such as the ground texture
convergence and the convergence lines at the vanishing point located at the implicit horizon.
The implicit horizon is deduced perceptually rather than seen explicitly. However, effective
eye height is also available through a combination of three vestibular/ocular-motor cues: the
vertical orientation of the head with respect to gravity, the position of the eye relative to the
head, and the location of a point of fixation on the retina (Matin & Li, 1992).
Since the line of sight is orthogonal to the object's vertical orientation (see Figure 1), the
geometrical rules of optics enable expression of the object's dimensions (such as its height
and width) as an eye-height ratio (Sedgwick, 1980). Moreover, the anthropometric
relationship between eye height and other body dimensions (such as body height and width)
is usually constant. Thus, perceiving an object's dimensions as an eye-height ratio provides
the perceiver-actor with information on the relationship between the characteristics of the
environment and his/her own dimensions. Since an affordance corresponds to this type of
relation, perception of affordance means that information such as the eye-height ratio has
to be picked up.
__,_- V '-
,7 y-e
twae/ y E Y

Figure 1. Illustration of the geometrical rules of optics that express the height of the object as
a proportion of the perceiver—actor’s eye height (i.e. an eye-height ratio), where Y is the object’s total
height, E is the portion of the object below the horizon, and y and e are the respective heights
expressed as visual angles. The height of the object depends on the eye height and is expressed as a
visual angle: Y/E = 1 + tan(y—e) / tan(e).
Several experimental studies have demonstrated that the perceived limits of an affordance
are based on the eye-height ratio. When examining the affordance of passage through an
aperture, Warren & Whang (1987) measured the critical aperture (as a width) that enabled
passage without having to turn the shoulders sideways. In Experiment 3, they reduced the
effective eye height (EEH) by introducing a raised false-floor in the room where the aperture
to be estimated was located. Their results showed that judgments of the critical aperture
(Aminp) were lower in the raised floor condition while the aperture/eye-height ratio (i.e.
Aminp/ EEH) remained constant. Indeed, this ratio was 0.29 in the raised floor condition and
0.28 in the flat floor condition. Moreover, participants were asked to verbally evaluate
different absolute distances between themselves and the aperture. It was found that the
raised floor did not have a significant effect on the verbal distance estimations. Thus, critical

15

"
"6","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
passability through an aperture appears to be judged on the basis of an eye-height ratio.
Using another method, Mark (1987) studied the involvement of eye height in the perception
of maximum riser height (Rmax) and maximum sitting height (SHmaX). The real and effective
eye heights were increased by strapping blocks (each 10cm in height) to the perceiver-
actors’ feet. Lower leg and total leg lengths were thus increased, whi|st leaving the upper leg
length unchanged. From a biomechanical point of view, Rmax was equal to the total leg length
(L) plus the upper leg length (L1) minus the lower leg length (L2): Rmax= L+ L1- L2 where
L: L1 + L2 and Rmax= 2L1. The real Rmax was not affected by the blocks because it depends on
the upper leg segment (see Figure 2). In contrast, the blocks increased the real SHmax
because it depends on L1 and L2. In other words, adding blocks to one’s feet is not
comparable to actually being ta||er because the body's normal proportions are not
maintained - only the lower part of the leg is increased. As a result, adding a ""platform sole""
does not allow the wearer to climb higher stairs but it does enable him/her to sit on higher
chairs. Thus, if individuals use the same eye-height ratio, with and without blocks, to judge
Rmax and SHmaX, they should overestimate their real Rmax and underestimate their real SHmax
when wearing blocks.
L1
L2
L1 L1
L L:
Blocks L2
Blacks
in} {bi

Figure 2. Schematic representation of biomechanical models for Rmax (a) and SHmax (b).

Mark's results showed that there was no significant difference between the eye-height ratio
values that the participants (who were not allowed to practice with the blocks beforehand) used to
judge Rmax with and without blocks. The same was true for SHmax judgments. Indeed, the eye-height
ratios for the perceived Rmax and SHmax in the first trial were respectively 0.445 and 0.466 with blocks
and 0.457 and 0.454 without blocks. However, the eye-height ratios for the real Rmax and SHmax with
blocks were 0.437 and 0.492. This means that the same eye-height ratio was used with and without
blocks and thus caused the real Rmax and SHmax to be overestimated and underestimated, respectively.
The individuals were judging opportunities for action as if their biomechanical properties had not
changed. Between each set ofjudgments, individuals were allowed to move around on the blocks. At
the last set of judgments (in Experiment 2), the participants' judgments were based on new eye-
height ratios, i.e. ratios that had been recalibrated with respect to the true possibilities for action. The
eye-height ratios for Rmax and SHmax for the last trials with blocks were 0.429 and 0.482, respectively -
very close to the real Rmax and SHmax eye-height ratios with blocks (0.437 and 0.492). Thus, in order to
detect an affordance, the perceiver-actor probably uses an eye-height ratio that has been previously
learned.

16

"
"7","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
GOAL OF THE PRESENT EXPERIMENT
Here, by directly manipulating the effective eye height with prisms, we aimed to show that
the opportunity to pass under a barrier could be perceived according to a particular eye-
height ratio. Moreover, we sought to establish whether or not the effective eye height
(subserved by a plastic mechanism) can be learned. Van der Meer (1997) defined the critical
point of this affordance as the minimum height of a horizontal barrier under which an
individual could pass without lowering the head. The limit of this affordance can be
described as a rt ratio: 7t = BHmin/H, where BHmin is the minimum height of the barrier and H
is the standing height of the perceiver-actor. Theoretically, an individual can pass under a
barrier if this ratio is greater than 1. If it is not, he/she must either (i) adapt his behavior (by
ducking the head downwards and forwards, for example) in order to pass safely or (ii) stop
the action. In order to quantify this real critical point, Van der Meer filmed her participants
walking freely under a barrier that was positioned at different heights. The height at which
they began to duck was defined as the critical point of the affordance. The results showed
that adults walking at a normal speed began to lean their heads when the barrier height was
1.038 times their own height. Thus, when performing the real action, the effective ratio of
the affordance's critical point is T[ = BHmin/ H = 1.038.
Since rea| eye height (EH) is a constant (c) of body height (EH= c x H), we suggest that the
effective rt ratio can be also formulated according to the participant's rea| eye height and c.
With H = EH / c, T[ = BHmin/ H is equivalent to T[ = BHmin / (EH / c) = BHmin x (c/ EH).
Thus, T[ = (BHmin/ EH) x c = 1.038. Let Tc’ be the eye-height ratio of the affordance's critical
point (7t’ = BHmin / EH). Thus, T[ = Tc’ x c = 1.038. This eye-height ratio (n’) can be obtained by
dividing 1.038 by C, Le. Tc’ = 1.038 / c.
According to the ecological approach to perception, perceiver-actors should detect this ratio
(n’) when they have to judge visually whether or not they can pass under a barrier. In order
to test this hypothesis, we modified the effective eye height using prismatic glasses.
The method was composed of four successive sessions with three different experimental
conditions. First, the perceiver-actors judged their eye height and their critical height of
passability without any optical deviations (the baseline condition). Second, the same
judgments were made wearing prismatic glasses (the prism condition). Following an
adaptation period (during which the perceiver-actors had to perform a target-based motor
activity while wearing the prisms), a third session was performed after removal of the
prismatic glasses (the after-effect condition).
The prisms deflect the light reflected by the surfaces and the objects by a set number of
degrees, translating the visually perceived position of surfaces and objects into a new
”virtual” position. For example, in the case of ZOPD base-up prisms, the light is deflected
downward by 115°. The perceiver-actor sees the entire scene lower than it really is. If the
perceiver-actor is prevented from adapting to the deviation and must adjust a target to his
eye height, he/she will thus place it higher than it really is, in order to compensate for the
downward deflection of the light. During the adaptation phase, he has to look constantly in
17

"
"8","CPL - 24(1) - 2008

the direction of the deflection and the resting position of the eyes is recalibrated (Howard,
1982). Thus, the effective eye height could be changed by the prismatic paradigm. In
particular, after the adaptation to base-up prisms, a downward shift in perceived eye-height
judgments has been observed, when compared with initial judgments (Ooi, Wu & He, 2001).
In the present experiment, we applied 20PD base-up prisms. If perception of BHmin is
specified by an eye-height ratio, it should be shifted in the same manner as perceived eye
height. Thus, compared with the baseline condition, the eye height and BHmin judgments
should be higher in the prism condition. Moreover, a significant after-effect (i.e. lower
judgments in the after-effect condition than at baseline) would argue in favor of eye height
recalibration. Eye height adaptation (recalibration via motor activity performed during the
adaptation phase) would suggest the existence of a plastic learning mechanism that
calibrates body information against the visual layout.

IVIETHOD

PARTICIPANTS

Eight volunteers (5 women and 3 men with a mean (SD) age of 22.37 (1.37), all
undergraduate psychology students) gave their informed, written consent to participation in the
experiment. All had vision that was normal or corrected to normal by lenses.

MATERIAL AND APPARATUS

The experiment took place in a test room where a small corridor (2.50 m high, 97 cm wide
and 3 m long) was demarcated by black, opaque curtains. The floor was covered with small
phosphorescent spots (about 3cm in diameter). On the wall opposite to the participants, an
adjustable, horizontal board (30 x 40 x 2 cm) was fixed to a long, vertical bar (see Figure 3) and was
used as a cursor. The experimenter could adjust the height of the board from a minimum of 24 cm
from the ground to a maximum of 224 cm. Graduations on the bar enabled the board's height from
the ground to be read. The edge of the board facing the participants was colored with
phosphorescent paint. When the lights were turned off, only the board's edge (2 cm x 40 cm) and the
phosphorescent spots scattered on the ground were visible. All sessions other than the prism
adaptation phase were performed in the dark with the phosphorescent spots on the ground visible.
Even though this method created an impoverished environment, it appeared to be preferable to limit
visual cues and thus prevent the participants from using the latter as the basis for their judgments.
Participants stood upright 280 cm from the wall with the adjustable, luminous board edge and in such
a way that the board's horizontal centre coincided with their sagittal plane.

18

"
"9","CPL - 24(1) - 2008

Figure 3. Schematic representation of the experimental apparatus.

PROCEDURE

The participants were tested individually in the dark and had to indicate to the experimenter
the positions at which the board’s luminous edge corresponded to two height estimates: (i) their
perceived minimal barrier height (BHminp) and (ii) their perceived eye height (EHp). BHminp was defined
as the minimum perceived height of a horizontal barrier under which the participant could pass
without lowering his (her) head. We told the participants that the barrier was represented by the thin,
luminous, rectangular edge of the board. The BHminp was judged without performing the real action.
The perceived eye height was defined as the height at which the individual perceived that his (her)
horizontal line of gaze intersected the facing wa|| ahead, with the luminous rectangular edge
representing that height.

The BHminp and EHp judgments were each estimated six times in three different visual
conditions. In condition 1 (baseline), the participant wore glasses with no correction in the dark. After
his (her) last judgment in this condition, he (she) closed his (her) eyes while the experimenter
replaced the normal glasses with ZOPD base-up prismatic ones. The participant opened his (her) eyes
and made the same judgments with prisms (condition 2: prism condition). At the end of the last
judgment in this condition, an adaptation phase began. The room lights were turned on and the
participant was asked to stand 2 m away from another wall. He (she) was given 20 min to practice
hitting two targets drawn on the wall (respectively 130 and 170 cm from the ground) with small,
smooth balls. Next, he (she) was placed in the same posture as in the first two conditions and the
lights were again switched off. The participant closed his (her) eyes while the experimenter replaced
the prismatic glasses with the normal ones. Then, once he (she) had opened his (her) eyes, the
participant was told to make the same judgments as before (condition 3: after-effect condition). Once
this session was over, the real standing height (i.e. minimum barrier height) and eye height were
measured and the participant was debriefed.

During the six trials, the initial position of the board was set at either 111 cm or 224 cm from
the ground. The order of presentation of this initial position was counterbalanced over the six trials.
Under verbal instructions from the participant, the experimenter (who was behind a black curtain and
not visible during the test) raised or lowered the board until the desired position was reached. Each
participant performed 6 judgments in 3 viewing conditions for the 2 requested heights (tasks), i.e. a
total of 36 trials.

RESULTS

The mean height judgment in centimeters was calculated over the six trials for each viewing
condition and for each task. The results are shown in Figure 4.

19

"
"10","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
205
IEHp
HE 'EI BHminp
; :35
En 1‘15
'1!
g ms
5%“ 155
E“ 145
135
125
BAH EL] N E PR] SM 3 AF TER— EF FECT

Figure 4. Mean height (in cm) estimated by the participants according to the type of
judgment and the viewing condition. Bars represent the SD.

The assumptions required for an analysis of variance (a normal distribution and sphericity of
the variance-covariance matrix) were met at p >.1. A two-factor ANOVA (3 viewing conditions x 2
tasks) with repeated measures on both factors was carried out on the mean height judgments (in cm).
The analysis showed a significant effect of both viewing condition [F(2,14) = 61.55; p < .0001] and task
[F(2, 15) = 55.79; p < .0001]. The interaction between the two factors was not significant [F(2, 14) = .58;
p = .57]. Post-hoc comparisons (using the Newman-Keuls test) revealed that relative to the baseline
condition (M = 150.10 cm), the perceived eye height was greater in the prism condition
(M: 181.90 cm; p< .001) and lower in the after-effect condition (i.e. after the adaptation phase;
M = 139.76 cm; p < .05). The same pattern of results was observed for BHminp judgments; compared
with the baseline condition (M = 165.03 cm), BHminp judgments were greater in the prism condition
(M = 193.83 cm; p < .001) and lower in the after-effect condition (M = 155.53 cm; p < .05).

Moreover, a correlation analysis (testing the significance of the Bravais-Pearson coefficient)
showed that in each of the three viewing conditions, the two judgments (BHminp and EHp) were
strongly and significantly correlated: r= .81, t(6) = 3.40, p = .01 for the baseline condition, r= .72,
t(6)=2.56, p< .05 for the prism condition and r= .90, t(6)=5.04, p< .01 for the after-effect
condition.

The participants’ rea| eye height and standing height were, on average, 156.92 cm and
168.24 cm, respectively. Thus, the eye height corresponded to 93% (SD = .007) of the standing height
(c = .93). We have suggested (see the Introduction) that since eye height (EH) is a constant (c) of the
body height (EH = c x H), the effective TE ratio can be expressed according to the participant's rea| eye
height: 1t’ = BHmin / EH = BHmin / (H x c) = (BHmm / H) x (1 / c) = 1.038 / c. In the present experiment, the
participants' average 1t’ ratio was estimated to be 1.11: n’ = 1.038/.93 = 1.11; SD = .009. The data
collected in the baseline-condition enabled computation of the participants’ natural n’p ratio:
n’p= BHminp/EHp, where M(BHminp)= 165.03 cm and M(EHp)= 150.10 cm. This yielded an average
value of 1.10 (SD: .03). Comparing n’p with n’ in Student's t test did not reveal any significant
difference (t(7) = -1.167; p = .28).

In order to establish the precision of the eye-height judgment for the baseline condition, we

compared the judgments of eye height (M = 150.10 cm; SD = 6.79 cm) with the

measurements of the real eye height (M: 156.92 cm; SD: 3.51 cm). A Student's t test
20

"
"11","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
revealed a significant difference: t(7) = 2.86; p = .026. For the baseline condition, the
perceived eye height was judged to be lower than the real eye height, with an average
underestimation of 4.33%.

DISCUSSION

In the present work, we sought to establish a link between effective eye height and the
critical limit of an affordance of passage under a barrier. Van der Meer (1997) has shown that at
normal walking speed, the real minimal height under which adults passed without lowering their head
was 1.038 times their standing height. Her experiment thus determined the real critical point of this
affordance. The objective of the present experiment was to test whether the eye-height ratio could
possibly provide relevant information on deciding what future action to take (i.e. to duck the head or
not). We directly modified the effective eye height by using base-up prisms. The experimental
method featured three different conditions: (i) a baseline condition (without prisms), (ii) a prism
condition and (iii) an after-effect condition (without prisms but just after a prism adaptation phase).
In each of these conditions, both perceived eye height and perceived minimal barrier height were
measured.

The results showed that viewing conditions had a clear effect on the perceived heights. The
perceived eye height and the perceived minimal barrier height were greater in the prism condition
(181.90 cm and 193.83 cm, respectively) than in the baseline condition (EHp= 150.10 cm and
BHmin= 165.03 cm). Moreover, after a prism adaptation phase (which consisted in throwing balls at
two different targets on a wall), these two judgments were lower than in the baseline condition
(139.76 cm and 155.53 cm, respectively). The lack of significant interaction between the two factors
(namely the viewing condition and the type of judgment) suggests that the deflection produced by
the prisms (in the prism condition and the after-effect condition) has a similar-sized effect (or, at
least, one that does not significantly differ) on the perceived eye height and minimal barrier height.
The perceived eye-height ratios in the different viewing conditions were not significantly different:
1.10, 1.06 and 1.11 for the baseline, prism and after-effect conditions, respectively. Moreover, the
strong positive correlations between the two judgments (observed in each of the three viewing
conditions) confirmed that the perceived eye height and the perceived critical limit of the affordance
are closely linked. These overall results agree with ecological studies of the role of eye height (e.g.
Warren & Whang, 1987; Mark, 1987). Indeed, we also showed that modification of the perceived eye
height leads to an equivalent change in the perceived critical limit of the affordance. In order to
decide whether or not they can pass under a barrier without lowering their head, individuals may pick
up, in the energetic array, an eye-height ratio (it’p= 1.10) which directly specifies the limits of their
actions.

Moreover, since the perceived eye height was lower in the after-effect condition, the
adaptation procedure (which involved aiming at two targets while wearing base-up prisms) seems to
be enough to change the effective eye height. During the adaptation phase, the participants
perceived the consequences of their actions as being lower than they really were. They could scale
the perception of their action capacities on their new, decreased effective eye height: the action
enabled recalibration of the perception of affordances. The fact that the post-adaptation perceived
eye height was underestimated (relative to the baseline condition) could be interpreted, as suggested
by Howard (1982), as a recalibration in the sense of the position of the eyes in the head (sustained by
a change in the innervation in the agonistic and antagonistic muscles) and in the sense of the head
position. Thus, our results suggest that affordance perception does not depend solely on optical
invariants (the eye-height ratio specified in the optic array) but rather on a multimodal invariant given
by the global array (the eye-height ratio specified by optical, vestibular and oculomotor components).

21

"
"12","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
The picking up of this information may be learned, subserved by a plastic mechanism, by the
consequences of action (after-effect).

However, the classical approach offers an alternative view of the use of eye-height ratio; the
perceived size of an object (Sp) is sensed to be equal to its retinal image (Sq) multiplied by its
perceived distance (Dp) from the observer (Sp=Sax Dp). In the present experiment, the base-up
prisms could also have affected the perceived distance. According to the classical approach, this
would in turn shift the perceived object’s height. In the prism condition, for example, underestimation
of the perceived distance could have led to underestimation of the perceived heights (see the
equation above). To compensate for this decrease in height perception, the observers must increase
their final judgments of BHmin. In addition, Ooi, Wu & He (2001) used base-up prisms to show that
perceived distance (estimated in a blindfolded-walking paradigm) was affected by the prisms both
during exposure and after the adaptation phase. In particular, these authors found that distance
overestimation as an after-effect of prism adaptation was due to a lower perceived eye height. Thus,
our results do not rule out an effect of prisms on the perceived distance. However, a geometrical
description of the optical array allows one to independently express the perceived height and the
perceived distance as eye-height ratios. The object's height is defined as an eye-height ratio by the
following equation: Y/E = 1+tan(y-e)/tan(e), where Y is the total height of the object, E is the
portion of the object from the ground to the horizon and y and e express these heights as visual
angles (Wraga & Proffitt, 2000). The equation concerning the perceived distance is Z/E = 1/tan(e),
where Z is the distance between the object and the observer and e is the height of the object below
the horizon, expressed as a visual angle (Warren & Whang, 1987). These equations show that
although the perceived height and distance of an object are not directly linked, both depend on the
horizon and thus the effective eye height of the perceiver-actor. Hence, our results can be interpreted
as a direct effect of the perceived eye height on the perceived minimum barrier height, even though
the perceived distance could also be affected in a concomitant way.

One can also consider the fit between perception and action: in the baseline condition, the
perceiver-actor judged the critical height of the barrier (i.e. under which they thought they could pass
without ducking), to be lower (at 165.03 cm) than their real standing height (168.24 cm) (BHminp/ H =
0.98). At first glance, this result contradicts the hypothesis whereby there is a fit between perceived
and actual affordance. However, if we consider the perceived eye height and not the real eye height,
we find that the former was underestimated by 4.33% in the baseline condition. This might be due to
the fact that perception in our experiments occurred in a very impoverished environment and in the
absence of movement. Without this underestimation, the perceived minimum height would have
been higher by 7.14 cm (165.03 cm x 4.33 / 100). Thus, without this underestimation, the perceived
minimum height would have been 1.023 times their own standing height:
BHminp/H = (165.03 + 7.14) / 168.24 = 1.023. This critical ratio is lower than (but very close to) that
determined by Van der Meer (1.038). It appears that individuals have lower safety margins when they
merely have to judge whether they can pass under a barrier or not than when they actually have to
perform the action. This result is in agreement with that found by Warren & Whang (1987).
Concerning the passability through an aperture (in width), these authors found a TE ratio of 1.30 when
the action was carried out. This ratio was higher than that measured with the perceptual judgments
(1.16). Moreover, the perceived ratio of critical height relative to the perceived eye height measured
in the presentwork(1t’p= BHminp / EHp; it’p= 1.10) is not significantly different from the real eye-height
ratio (7t’ = BHmin / EH = 1.038 / c; it’ = 1.11 with c = 0.93) computed from Van der Meer’s results. This
agreement between the effective and perceived ratios supports the usefulness of an eye-height ratio
for specifying the ability to walk under a barrier. The fact that underestimation of the perceived eye
height affected the perception of affordance in the present experiment does not undermine the eye-
height ratio’s utility. The experimental room was a relatively impoverished environment, chosen in

22

"
"13","CPL - 24(1) - 2008
order to avoid bias in the judgments (see the ""Material and apparatus"" section). In a weII-Iit, natural
environment, the eye-height underestimation would be lower (Stoper & Cohen, 1986). Furthermore,
at a distance close enough to actually pass under a barrier (e.g. through a door), the effective eye-
height estimate usually becomes more accurate and thus the perception of affordances does as well
(Mark, 1987). Thus, it is reasonable to suppose that if our participants had been able to walk towards
the barrier (as in Van der Meer’s study) and/or if they had been placed in a more natural visual
environment, they could have made more accurate judgments.

In summary, the perception of the ability to walk under a barrier without ducking one’s head
may be based on picking up a specific eye-height ratio (it’p= 1.10). If the barrier is less than 1.1times
their effective eye height, individuals perceive that they can not pass under it without ducking. In
contrast, if the barrier height is over 1.1 times their effective eye height, they perceive that they can
pass under it without changing their posture while walking. Picking up this information in the ambient
global array (via different perceptual systems) allows individuals to adapt their behavior in real time
and pass under the barrier safely. Thus, the individual can guide his own behavior by picking up
intrinsic information, a multimodal invariant extracted from visual, vestibular and somesthetic cues.
This multimodal invariant specifies what the environment offers him (her) in terms of possible actions
relative to his (her) own capabilities. The use of this information is based on a plastic mechanism
which allows a high degree of adaptability.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Howard, |. P. (1982). Human visual orientation. New-York: John Willey and Sons.

Luyat, M., & Regia-Corte, T. (in press). Les affordances de James Jerome Gibson aux
formalisations récentes du concept. L’Anne’e Psychologique.

Mark, L. S. (1987). Eyeheight-scaled information about affordances: a study of sitting and
stair climbing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13, 361-370.

Ooi, T. L., Wu, B., & He, Z. J. (2001). Distance determined by the angular declination below
the horizon. Nature, 414, 197-200.

Oudejans, R. R. D., Michaels, C. F. M., Bakker, F. C., & Dolné, M. A. (1996). The relevance of
action in perceiving affordances: perception of catchability of fly balls. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 22, 879-891.

Regia Corte, T., Luyat, M., Darcheville, J-C., & Miossec, Y. (2004). La perception d’une
affordance pour une posture verticale par |es systemes perceptivo—moteurs visuel et haptique.
L’Anne’e Psychologique, 104, 169-201.

Sedgwick, H. A. (1980). The geometry of spatial layout in pictural representation. In M. Hagen
(Ed.), The perception ofpictures VI (pp. 33-90). New-York: Academic Press.

Stoffregen, T. A. (2003). Affordances as properties of the animaI-environment system.
Ecological Psychology, 15, 115-134.

23

"
"14","CPL - 24(1) - 2008

Stoper, A. E., & Cohen, M. M. (1986). Judgments of eye level in light and darkness. Perception
and Psychophysics, 40, 311-316.

Turvey, M. T. (1992). Affordances and prospective control: An outline of the ontology.
Ecological Psychology, 4, 173-187.

Van der Meer, A. L. H. (1997). Visual guidance of passing under a barrier. Early Development
and Parenting, 6, 149-157.

Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances: visual guidance of stair climbing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 683-703.

Warren, W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of stair climbing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13, 371-383.

Wraga, M. (1999). Using eye height in different postures to scale the heights of objects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25, 518-530.

Wraga, M., & Proffitt, D. R. (2000). Mapping the zone of eye height utility for seated and
standing observers. Perception, 29, 1361-1383.

24

"
