"","x"
"1","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
DOI 10.1007/s12217-012-9320-y
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Protein Experiment: Scientiﬁc Data Processing Platform

for On-Flight Experiment Tuning

Luis David Patiﬁo-Lopez - Klaas Decanniere - J ose Antonio Gavira -

Dominique Maes - Fermin Otalora

Received: 3 August 2011 / Accepted: 10 J uly 2012

© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

Abstract In 2009, the PROTEIN experiment was run platform and finishing with experiment redesign and

on board of the Columbus module of the International update, is described through several examples.

Space Station to investigate the crystallization of pro-

teins in microgravity using the Protein Crystallization Keywords ISS - Columbus - PCDF - Protein

Diagnostics Facility. This instrument was designed to crystallization - Nucleation

allow almost real time modification of remote-operated

space experiments on request by the Science Team.

The complexity of the experiments and the expected

high volume of raw scientific data required the devel- Introduction

opment of ad-hoc analysis tools in order to provide

scientist with a quick and in-depth picture of experi- The Protein Crystallization Diagnostics Facility

ment progress. The integrated data analysis platform (PCDF) is a multi-diagnostic facility developed by the

presented in this paper allowed early inspection of European Space Agency (ESA),within ESA’s program

running experiment results and provided information Elips, for the investigation of protein crystallization

for impromptu, fine-tuning experimental conditions. in microgravity (Pletser et a1. 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003,

The feedback loop starting with remote data acquisi- 2009a, b; Stapelmann et a1. 2001).

tion, followed by on ground analysis performed by the The instrument was used during the PCDF-
PROTEIN experiment which took place on the Inter-
national Space Station’s laboratory Columbus from
March 15th, 2009 (Discovery shuttle, STS-119/15A)
to July 31th, 2009 (Endeavour shuttle, STS-127/2JA),

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this investigating the nucleation and growth Of protein

article (dOi:10.1007/812217-012-9320-y) contains crystals in four reactors, EP1 t0 EP4

suppleme.ntary material’WhiChiS available The glucose isomerase protein from Streptomyces

to authorized users. . . .

— rubzgmosus (D-Xylose ketol isomerase, EC 5.3.1.5) has

L- D- PatiﬁO-LOPGZ ('3) °J-.A-GaV/if§l°F-Ot310ra been selected for this study as it is well characterized

%:%¥?gsricécerEégflﬁi(2125121133322: 4’ (Sleutel et al. 2009a, b; Kozak 2005; Van Driessche

18100 Armilla, Granada, Spain et a1. 2009;V1sur1 et a1. 1999; Oberthuer et a1. 2012) and

e-mail: 1uisdavid@lec.csic.es commercially available.

. During such a crystallization experiment, protein
ISQ Decanmeye ' D' Maes . . molecules are transported from the bulk solution
tructural Biology Brussels, Flanders Interun1vers1ty , ,

Institute for Biotechnology, Vrije Universtiteit Brussel, towards the growmg crystal. On earth thlS mass trans‘

Brussels, Belgium port is dominated by convection, whereas in micrograv-

K. Decanniere ity diffusion becomes the main transport mechanism.

e-mail:klaas.decanniere@vub.ac.be Therefore, crystal nucleation and growth kinetics is

Published online: 21 July 2012 @ Springer

"
"2","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
expected to differ significantly between earth- and equipped With a glass wedge providing an internal
microgravity-based crystallization experiments. reference for the refractive indeX.

Even for a well-characterized model protein as glu- The PCDF instrument accommodates 4 reactors (see
cose isomerase, optimal experimental conditions for Table 1). Each reactor can be observed by a range
microgravity experiments can therefore not be fully of diagnostics. An XYZ motorized stage allows using
predicted from ground-based experiments. These as- a Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), a Wide field of
pects explain the requirement of an interactive setup VieW (WFOV) microscope, and a pseudo-darkfield mi-
With fast update times. croscopy (MIC) instruments to be moved in the appro-

The PCDF is the first complex microgravity facility priate position for observing one of the reactors. Two
that allows to follow and to modify a protein crystal- of the reactors allocations (EP2, EP4) have a Phase-
lization experiment in near real-time based on on-the- shifting Mach-Zehnder interferometer. Acquisition is
ﬂy analysis of the data. This dynamic control requires restricted by hardware to a “one reactor/one diagnos-
a continuous coordination between the Science Team ties” at a time.
and the operators and represented a major challenge Figure 1 provides a schematic VieW of the reactor
from the operational point of View. The PCDF-to- volume and the planes observed by the different in-
Ground communication was ensured by a complex struments. The Wide field-of-VieW microscope provides
communication protocol described by De Smet (Smet a global image (20 x 20 mm View, 0.61 magnification)
et a1. 2010), and managed by operators in the User Sup- of the central reactor volume, Viewed from the top.
port and Columbus Control Centres. Science related The microscope allows a closer look (4.09 x 4.09 mm
data was processed in Granada (LEC-IACT labora- View, x3 magnification), and the entire reactor vol-
tory) and distributed to members of the science team ume can be covered by performing a volumetric scan
in Spain and Belgium. of 4 x 3 x 4 images. These images allow identifying

Focused on this last stage of the information loop, and tracking crystals Within the observation volume
this work provides a detailed description of the auto- (14 x 11 x 10.5 mm3) as well as size determination. The
matic scientific data processing and information distrib- pseudo-darkfield illumination helps to identify crystal
ution system developed for the PROTEIN experiment, edges and faces.
in order to support the decision making process by the The dynamic light scattering instrument is a quasi-
Science Team. back scattering configuration With a laser diode emit-

The PCDF instrument characteristics and ﬂight ting at 683 nm, and a photomultiplier tube (PMT)
experiments are described in Section “PCDF Instru— collecting the scattering field at 170 O. This instrument
mentation and Experiments”. In Section “On-Flight allows the characterization of small particles in solution
Scientific Data Management” the protocol for scien- and is dedicated to detect and follow nucleation Within
tific data processing is analysed With examples from the scattering volume (a few cubic microns).
selected experimental sequences. Finally, in Section The MZI instrument available on two of the four
“Discussion”, discussion on some events during ﬂight reactors measures small differences in refractive indeX.
that required experiment modification is given. For crystals growing in the diffusion-limited regime,

a depletion zone (DZ) Will form as the solution sur-
rounding the crystal is depleted of protein, thus locally
modifying the refraction indeX (Otalora et a1. 2002;
PCDF Instrumentation and Experiments McPherson et a1. 1999). The MZI therefore provides
information about mass transport in the Vicinity of the
The PCDF instrument has been extensively described growing crystal. The observation plane is perpendicular
(Pletser et al. 2009a), and therefore, only main charac— to the WFOV/MIC plane, and covers the Whole section
teristics are summarized. of the reactor (9.9 x 9.9 mm, x1.2 magnification).

A PCDF reactor has a main body made of quartz
and 3 teﬂon inserts: one stirrer and 2 injectors. Viton
O-rings guarantee a liquid tight seal. The injectors can
be moved forward individually, providing the 130551- Tablel PCDF reactors and available experiment diagnosis
bility to modify the solution conditions in the central Reactor Studies DLS MIC WFOV MZI
observation volume. The stirrer allows homogenization EP1 Nucleation \/ \/ \/ _
of the reactor content. Each reactor has an indepen- EP2 Nucleation/depletion zones \/ \/ \/ \/
dent temperature control circuit. Reactors to be used EP3 NUCIGatiOH \/ \/ \/ —
With a Phase-shifting Mach-Zehnder interferometer are W
@ Springer

"
"3","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
Fig. 1 WFOV image of a
PCDF reactor and schematic . ' . _ g:
View of the instrumentation ' . . MIUWFQV ‘1
observation planes . ' ' _ . ﬂhﬁﬁr‘r’aﬂﬂn :
..-. _ ' plane 3
' _ - _ ' _ (Hy: adjuatahle] Irlﬂ”
I .L _ _ _ _ _ _ TI""- ___ ._ _ Jr—
| .- ,... ‘ _ I ' '
L' 2:
' I MZI
'. | f _ _ I - ubscrwaliun
1' I ' *1” . I v‘: E {ﬁxed}
‘L_'_____J E‘l'
n.2- ‘* ' l - I
. "" _ ‘ j 14 mm
' - Scattering volume
' [pnsitiun agar. adjustable]

Two reactors (EPl, EP3) were dedicated exclusively diagnostic facilities were sequentially applied during
to nucleation studies, whereas EP2 and EP4 were all the process but priority was given to DLS data.
dedicated both to nucleation and depletion zones The dissolution-nucleation process triggered by cooling
studies (see Table 1). down or heating up was executed three times at three

For the nucleation studies two main parameters must different cooling rates, as seen in Fig. 2. Once the three
be controlled i.e. supersaturation and supersaturation temperature ramps were executed for a given reactor
rate. Therefore experiments were designed such as the conditions, protein and/or precipitant injections could
glucose isomerase phase diagram was covered by mul- be performed to move through the phase diagram prior
tiple reactor starting conditions while the supersatu— a new cycle of nucleation studies.
ration rate was controlled by varying the temperature Depletion zones experimental cycles were similar
ramp slope. All nucleation experiments were designed to nucleation ones for the dissolution and nucleation
to have a common path that started with a dissolu— triggering but in this case to fine-tune the nucleation
tion step at 37 0C (during 5 h) followed by a nucle- density, the final temperature was screened at a fixed
ation step by decreasing the temperature to 17 0C. All heating rate. Here also all diagnostic facilities were

EP‘I ReacturTemperatun-z-

30.0-

3511 —| 1 ' 3

34 ﬂ _ 1. Injection, dissolution {3W0
' 2. Nucleation induction ramp

32.0- 3. Dissolution only

30.0-

23.0-

5-7“

20.0—

2 2

24.0-

22.0-

2cm—

13.0-

15.0 -1——.—.—.——.—.——.——.—.——.ﬁ
15:24 03:24 15:2-11t 03:24 15:24 03:24
03MB 00;“05 00205 10f05 10105 11;“05

Fig. 2 Typical Temperature Nucleation cycle (EPl reactor)
@ Springer

"
"4","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
sequentially applied but attention was focused on ob- Extraction of relevant information and considerable
serving growth and DZs., therefore most of acquired processing power were required in order to present a
data comes from the M21 instrument. concise picture of running experiments (see Table 2).

While active in Columbus, PCDF transmitted more Among them, crucial treatment includes the back-
than 35000 images and a similar number of DLS data ground correction and histogram optimization of MIC
sets, together with various telemetry packages monitor- and WFOV images and processing both autocorrela-
ing instrument behaviour. tion functions and count-rates to produce an accurate

particle size distribution. For this purpose, an inverse
method script based on a Non-NegatiVity Least Square
On-Flight Scientiﬁc Data Management procedure similar to CONTIN was used. Also detec-
tion and tracking of the formation of protein depletion
Telemetry Scientific Data zones require a fast processing of the phase shift MZI
images. Separate data extraction and subsequent re-
MIC, WFOV and M21 Images were recovered pre- integration of relevant housekeeping data to images
processed into Portable Network Graphics (PNG) for- were kept in the loop. For a detailed description of the
mat, from a dropbox at the Belgian User Support and processing mentioned in Table 2 please refer to online
Operation Centre (BUSOC), through a Virtual Private resource 1-
Network (VPN) connection. A fall-back option was
also setup through a Secure Shell (SSH) link between Automated Images Management
the LEC-Granada and the VUB-Brussels laboratories
in case of BUSOC-Granada connection failure. The WFOV, MIC and M21 images were processed and
latter connection worked fine all along the experiment. distributed during the experiment in order to provide

The DLS data were downloaded as telemetry pack- scientist with fresh information. A timed loop scheme,
ages through the software YAMCS (Yet Another with a waiting time of 2 h was used. This maximum
Monitoring and Control System), developed by Space delay was considered reasonable enough in case of
Application Systems (SAS, Zaventem, Belgium), to- needs for experimental modification. A LabView®-
gether with the instrument status information including based (National instruments, Austin, USA) automated
reactors temperature and the position of the injectors. timed loop (Fig. 3) executed the same script every 2 h,
Indeed, experiment related house-keeping data were performing gathering, processing and distribution of
recovered and processed for each image and DLS data the data. Some of the data processing sub-programs
set. The position of the injectors was used to pre- were written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, USA).
cisely calculate the composition of the reactor solution. The loop consisted in a folder synchronization
The injectors position was available in two redundant scheme, between BUSOC (Brussels) dropbox and
telemetry packets. It was found during ﬂight that the LEC-IACT (Granada) with processing, saving and dis-
position values were swapped out. Indeed, right/left tribution of new content at each iteration. The proce-
position values in one telemetry package matched dure is described step-by-step in anneX A1.
left/right positions in the other package This issue is Figure 4 show snapshots of MIC/MZI unwrapped
treated later in the discussion as it has been solved by phase pairs on EP4 reactor, for a depletion zone cycle.
examination of processed data. J ust after the dissolution (left) no crystals are observed,
Table 2 PCDF scientific data Telemetry data Required processing Expected information
and process1ng requirements —

MIC Background subtraction, Crystal detection,
histogram optimization growth observation

WFOV Background subtraction, Crystal detection,
histogram optimization growth observation

MZI Phase calculation, phase Depletion zone detection
unwrapping, plane-fitting and tracking

DLS Data inversion (CONTIN Aggregates size
like, see Annex B) distribution

Injectors Estimate reactor conditions Current position on

position (protein, precipitant, protein phase diagram
impurities concentration)
@ Springer

"
"5","Mierogravity Sci. Technol.
15 h later (centre), massive nucleation triggered the
apparition of numerous crystals. Thirty hours later,
110 more crystals appeared, but pre-eXisting ones
have grown.
WMT TILL MEET CSDMF’ﬁ-RE
SCHEDULED ITERMIDM DRDPED}: ""5 LDEﬁ-L FCJLDER
DLS Data Management
® ' As mentioned in Section “
”, DLS data were crucial for nucleation
studies. DLS data sets contain autocorrelation func-
tions (gm) and count rates. DLS data were not
CHEESE? IWGES processed automatlcally, but 011 request of the Selence
mmcs Team. Custom telemetry packages were downloaded
MD;- MEI for a specific period, and a script developed specifically
for these purposes performed the analysis, report gen-
rmxjfwmv MEI - - - - - _ -

l-l I F RD E 551w r3 eratloh, and dlstrlbutlon to. em emell hst. DLS reports
contamed the reactor condltlons (1.e. compounds con-
centrations), plots of temperature evolution, count rate

”33'3MFW3TIW‘3EE‘ statistics, ACFs and estimated size distributions as a
function of time.
Fi ure shows a DLS result as enerated b the
E-mail TC: SCIENCE TESUVI g . . g . . y

DLS processmg scrlpts, for a nucleatlon kmetlcs study
lasting 60 h. The goal was to induce nucleation by
Fig- 3 Images management timed 100p decreasing the temperature at different rates. Indeed,
three dissolution-nucleation-induction cycles were run

Fig. 4 Series of MIC (bottom) and corresponding MZI (top) images, corresponding to 3 EP4 reactor depletion zone study
@ Springer

"
"6","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
Fig. 5 Top: Size Distribution --1
as a function of time for a 1mm I I
Nucleation study (EP1). I I __ 2
Bottom: Reactor temperature 5 E E
for the same eriod E E _
I I a
5 a ""4 5
100nm = 5 3.
I I --5 5
I I m
E E 3
E E ""-5 g
1 = = :.
I . I --?' ”i
g . . = E:
E . ' ' E 5
‘1 Burn = I = ""3 E.
I - ' I 5:
I ' . l _
- . . ' - '9
= -' 'I =
'1'UCI'LJm E E __1[]
15:24 02:24 15:24 03:24 15:24 43:24
00:05 00:05 00:05 10:05 10:05 11:05
50-0--
350'
34.0—
32-0—
50-0-
20-0—
'0’
25-0—
24.0—
22-0-
20-0-
15-0—
lE""u_l I - I I I I I - I I I I I I I
15:24 [13:24 15:24. 03:24 15:24 [13:24
05:05 00:05 00:05 10:05 10:05 11:05
(Fig. 4 bot). Temperature variation is the same for the signal (LOS), and the cascade of user support and
three cycles (5 h at 37 0C for dissolution, followed by a control centres are difficulties that were planned for.
linear ramp from 29 to 17 0C) with increasing the cool— The combination of unexpected events inﬂuencing the
ing rate for consecutive cycles. In the size distribution instrument behaviour and the inherent trickiness of
plot (Fig. 5, top), a logarithmic colour map shows how protein crystallization experiments are at the origin
scattered intensity is distributed as a function of particle of the near-real-time requirements for the on-the—ﬂy
diameter (y aXis). It provides quantitative information control of the PCDF instrument.
concerning aggregates populations growing in size as The Daily Operations Report (DOR) kept by
temperature drops. The elementary population of the the Operators shows that the PCDF instrument was
protein (a tetramer with a 10 nm hydrodynamic diam- switched into “run mode” 36 times while 011 orbit, in-
eter) is Visible during the whole period. The forma— eluding all commissioning and science activities. Ten of
tion and growth of aggregates (in the micron range) is these runs were aborted due to unsatisfactory scientific
observed for the three cycles. results and/or instrument problems. Two of the runs
were stopped as the objectives for those experiments
were obtained sooner than expected.
Discussion For the aborted runs, quick assessment of data
obtained so far allowed to update our strategy and
Due to the remote location on board of the 188 with restart the experiments with minimal delay. For the
its specific procedures and the decentralized location of stopped cycles, constant monitoring of results allowed
the Team members across Europe, PCDF-PROTEIN to cut these runs short and t0 re—allocate time to other
was a “hands—off” experiment. Signal delays, loss of experiments.
@ Springer

"
"7","Microgravity Sci. Technol.

One example is the confusion between left and right the interferometer was not affected by this camera-
injectors. The PCDF House Keeping (HK) data have positioning malfunction. On that basis, the measuring
re un an en ries or e posi ion 0 e e an rig sc eme cou e a ap e o e new si ua ion wi in

ddt t fth t fthlft Cl ht h ldb dtdt th tt th
injectors. As injections determine the chemistry of hours, maximizing the use of the different resources
the experiments with left and right pistons containing available within the instrument and minimizing the
different solutions, the exact positions of the injectors impact on data completeness.
are Vital. In the data downloaded from space, one set of
parameters would show an injection on the left piston
where the other set of parameters would show the Conclusions
movement of the right piston. As the processed data
was available during the discussion of the problem, the An integrated suite has been developed for the process-
Science Team was able to determine which of the para- ing of MIC WFOV MZI DLS data and science related
meter sets was correct, based on protein crystallization HK data of the P(EDF instrument It also performed
beIXWIOEL 1 _ h f 11 f h f' 1 quasi-real time distribution of data to science team

f 110: er Eiimﬁﬁls t e 31 ow-up : tt e 1rstcycc: members located at different laboratories. The scripts
O reicclwd , ' th is was. e tveTBh 1rs exgeﬁlimen have been used successfully all along the Experiment
exeeu e t urirtig eletierimer; ' e airln 0 d fellex' and provided a full picture of experiments evolution to
Perlmen was 0 nuc ea e very ew crys a S an O OW scientists within a reasonable delay. Indeed, during the
their growth for several days. Figure 6 shows that the PROTEIN experiment more than 1000 e-mails con-
chosen conditions actually led to massive nucleation. taining around 35000 MalC WFOV and M21 processed
So although the nucleation data obtained was valid, we images and DLS p df reports were sent The timed 100p
could not obtained accurate data from their growth. . '
, worked nominally and only a few restarts were neces-
Therefore, the experiment was aborted, and restarted sary within the period Such a scheme was mandatory
with updated conditions that produced better results. for appropriate and rapid experiment modification.

A thud example is the contingency plan devel- The platform developed for this experiment could
oped after the failure of a stepper motor. This failure be of interest to other experiments, as it federates
bEOCked the cargerahpositionlforfonle Of the ?ree axecsl diverse analysis tools typically used in crystallization
O Crlnoverlnenctl. by the time t is. a1 ure wasth laggose and nucleation studies.It is functional for PCDF ground
an ana ySSH 133,1 te Engmeemlg, 63131121 Cf ts01ence models, but also practical for any crystallization and/or
eam was S 1 a e O eep acquiring a a s1nce nucleation studies. It could be adapted to other facili-

ties featuring remote operations. Scripts are available
upon request to corresponding authors.
_ . References
_ _ . ' - . _- . _ . . .. Kozak, M.: Glucose isomerase from Streptomyces rubiginosus —
-' :'_ ‘-Z'-_' .'_- ' - _ ‘ potential molecular weight standard for small-angle X-ray
-‘ -_ *HL. ._ j; ' .' _ scattering. J . Appl. Crystallogr. 38, 555—558 (2005)
'7""- ﬂ ' _ McPherson, A., Malkin, A.J., Kuznetsov, Y.G., Koszelak, S.,
' I' a "" ' ' _ Wells, M., J enkins, G., Howard, J ., Lawson, G.: The effects
- '_-"": 1‘ 3-.__' f 1. '- - of microgravity on protein crystallization: evidence for
r '. - concentration gradients around growing crystals. J . Cryst.
' - ' L ..'_ - Growth 196(2—4), 572—586 (1999)
* {'9‘ .--r .' 5""; '_ ' '_ .. Oberthuer, D., Melero-Garcia, E., Dierks, K., Meyer, A.,

_. - ‘ '- . '_'_.- _ ""' _' Betzel, C., Garcia-Caballero, A., GaVira, J .A.: Monitoring
' _ ' ' ' ' - - and scoring counter-diffusion protein crystallization experi-
' ‘ - ments in capillaries by in situ dynamic light scattering. PLOS

'1 _, One 7(6), e33545 (2012)

'I 1 Otalora, F., Garcia-Ruiz, J .M., Carotenuto, L., Castagnolo, D.,
._ . /- Novella, M.L., Chernov, A.A.: Lysozyme crystal growth
' kinetics in microgravity. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D: Biol.
‘ F Crystallogr. 58(10 II), 1681—1689 (2002)
- Pletser, V., Stapelmann, J., Potthast, L., Bosch, R.: The pro-
tein crystallization diagnostics facility, a new European
Fig. 6 EP4 Reactor after massive nucleation instrument to investigate biological macromolecular crystal
@ Springer

"
"8","Microgravity Sci. Technol.
growth on board the International Space Station. J . Cryst. Pletser, V., Decanniere, K., Maes, D., Otalora, F., Gavira, J .A.,
Growth 196(2—4), 638—648 (1999) Patiﬁo, L.D., Evrard, C., Van De Weerdt, C., Mazzoni, S.,
Pletser, V., Minster, 0., Bosch, R., Potthast, L., Stapelmann, Minster, 0.,P0tthast,L.,Bosch,R.,Lautenschlager,P.:First
J .: Fundamental research on protein crystallisation 0n the investigations With the protein crystallisation diagnostics fa-
ISS With ESA’S protein crystallisation diagnostics facility. cility on board the international space station. In: 60th Inter-
In: European Space Agency, (Special Publication) ESA SP, national Astronautical Congress 2009, IAC 2009, Daejeon.
Sorrento 2000. 1st International Symposium on Microgravity 60th International Astronautical Congress 2009, IAC 2009,
Research and Applications in Physical Sciences and Biotech- pp. 790—795 (2009b)
nology, pp. 1061—1068 Sleutel, M., Willaert, R., Gillespie, C., Evrard, C., Wyns, L., et al.:
Pletser, V., Minster, 0., Bosch, R., Potthast, L., Stapelmann, Kinetics and thermodynamics of glucose isomerase crystal-
J .: The protein crystallisation diagnostics facility: status of lization. Cryst. Growth Des. 9, 497—504 (2009a)
the ESA programme on the fundamentals of protein crystal Sleutel, M., Willaert, R., Wyns, L., Maes, D.: Polyhedral insta-
growth. J . Cryst. Growth 232(1—4), 439—449 (2001) bility of glucose isomerase crystals. Cryst. Growth Des. 9,
Pletser, V., Kassel, R., Joannes, L., Bosch, R.: Developing 335—343 (2009b)
scientific ground models of the Protein Crystallisation Di- Smet, L.D., Klai, S., Decanniere, K., Haumont, E.: Meticu—
agnostics Facility to prepare for protein crystallisation in- lous preparation and on-the-ﬂy flexibility enable successful
vestigations on board the International Space Station. In: PCDF PROTEIN Mission On 188 Paper presented at the
54th International Astronautical Congress of the Interna- SpaceOps 2010 Conference, Huntsville, Alabama
tional Astronautical Federation (IAF), the International Stapelmann, J.,Smolik, G.,Lautenschlager, P.,L0rk, W.,P1etser,
Academy of Astronautics and the International Institute V.: Towards protein crystal growth on the International
of Space Law, Bremen 2003. 54th International Astronau— Space Station (ISS)—Innovative tools, diagnostics and ap-
tical Congress of the International Astronautical Feder- plications. J . Cryst. Growth 232(1—4),468—472 (2001)
ation (IAF), the International Academy of Astronautics Van Driessche, A.E.S., Gavira, J .A., Patiﬁo—Lopez, L.D.,
and the International Institute of Space Law, pp. 4473— Otalora, F.: Precise protein solubility determination by
4483 Laser confocal differential interference contrast microscopy.
P1etser,V.,Bosch,R., Potthast, L.,Lautenschlager,P., Kassel, R.: J . Cryst. Growth 311, 3479—3484 (2009)
The Protein Crystallisation Diagnostics Facility (PCDF) 0n Visuri, K., Pastinen, 0., Wu, X., M’cikinen, K., Leisola, M.: Stabil-
board ESA Columbus laboratory. Microgravity Sci. Technol. ity of native and cross—linked crystalline glucose isomerase.
21(3), 269—277 (20093) Biotechnol. Bioeng. 64, 377—380 (1999)
@ Springer

"
