"","x"
"1","SpaceOps 2010 Conference<br><b><i>De|ivering on the Dream<lb><li><br><i>Hosted by NASA Mars AIAA 2010-2355
25 - 30 April 2010, Huntsville, Alabama
Successful PCDF PROTEIN M1ss10n 1n ISS after Metlculous
Preparatlon and On-the-ﬂy Flex1b111ty
L. De Smet1 and S. Kla'i2
Space Applications Services, Belgium
K. Decanniere3
Structural Biology Brussels, F landers Interuniversily Institutefor Biotechnology, Vrije Universtitez’t Brussel,
Belgium

Q and
§_ E. Haumont4
E Belgian Institutefor Space Aeronomy (IASB/BIRA), Belgium
a The Belgian User Support and Operations Centre (B.USOC) was responsible for the
950 preparations and in-ﬂight operations of the PCDF PROTEIN Mission that took place in ISS
g during four months in the first half of 2009. The Protein Crystallisation Diagnostics Facility
g (PCDF) allowed in-situ observation of nucleation and crystal growth behaviour of protein
.2 crystallisation experiments in microgravity. Therefore, incoming data could be analysed on-
; the-fly which permitted to modify the experiment in near-real-time. To achieve this
g experimental and operational ﬂexibility, extensive preparation was needed. This paper
3 reports on the various preparation and in-ﬂight activities performed by the B.USOC
g operators and the PCDF science team that led to the successful PCDF PROTEIN Mission
E accomplishment.
Q
52
E
g I. Introduction
8 PROTEIN crystals play an important role in several disciplines: in fundamental research such as X-ray 0r neutron
é crystallography aiming at determining the proteins three-dimensional atomic structure, in the creation of protein-
% based medicines such as insulin or in industrial processes such as the food industry. The crystals require very
g speciﬁc properties to be used in those various applications. Unfortunately, precise control of the crystallisation
a process can be challenging, even for well-known model systems, making it hard to produce and reproduce crystals
g with the required properties. The PCDF PROTEIN experiment speciﬁcally aimed at understanding how the
<2: conditions in which crystals are grown affect these properties, including size and crystalline quality.
5‘ Protein crystals grow from a supersaturated solution. First, a sufﬁcient number of protein molecules need to
:2: come together to form a nucleus. If this nucleus reaches a critical size, it starts growing by arrangement of protein
vi; molecules into a lattice, resulting in a macromolecular crystal with pronounced edges and faces. Growth stops when
E there are too many imperfections 0n the crystal surface or when there are not enough protein molecules left in the

solution.

During growth, the crystal absorbs molecules from the solution around it, creating a lower protein concentration
around the growing crystal with respect to the bulk of the solution. This zone is called the depletion zone and
indicates a mass density gradient. On Earth, gravity will cause convection destroying the concentration gradient,
1 Operations Engineer, Operations Group, Leuvensesteenweg 325, B-1932 Zaventem, Belgium, not an AIAA
member.

2 Operations Engineer, Operations Group, Leuvensesteenweg 325, B-1932 Zaventem, Belgium, not an AIAA
member.

3 PCDF Lead Scientist, Protein Crystallization Group, Pleinlaan 2, Gebouw E, B-1050 Brussel, not an AIAA
member.

4 PCDF Science Coordinator, B.USOC, Ringlaan 3, B-1180 Brussel, Belgium, not an AIAA member.

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2010 by Space Applications Service. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., with permission.

"
"2","Whereas in microgravity the depletion zone is left undisturbed as there is no convection. The net result is more pure
and bigger crystals. In addition, growth in microgravity allows focusing on non-convection-related processes that
occur during crystal growth.

Observation of the depletion zone in itself and a separation of convection-related and non-convection-related
processes determining crystal quality shall lead to better understanding and control of crystallisation, leading to
improved crystals even When grown on Earth.

Observation of the crystals themselves is also different: crystals are denser than the liquid and Will sink When
grown on Earth, Whereas they should stay Where they are in microgravity.

11. Experimental Set—up

The PCDF facility consists of two parts: the Electronics Unit, containing the electronics to control the

experiment and the Process Unit containing the reactors With protein samples and diagnostics. Both units are

m installed in the European Drawer Rack (EDR) in the Columbus module of the 188. A picture of the PCDF facility

‘2'.“ mounted in the EDR Engineering Model located at the Erasmus USOC in Noordwijk, The Netherlands, is shown in

E Fig. l.

g The PCDF instrument is split a

E in two parts for two reasons: ' -

Es limiting the mass of the payload to ‘g EDR'RaCk

S be transferred to the ISS and back, L ’

g) and the need for electric power . I

g during up- and download. The EDR-VMU

g latter is explained by the fact that l

g the proteins, contained in the , "" .-

§ Process Unit, need to be _ [ix

— continuousl tem erature ‘Vw , ,

g: controlled, yincluding durihg the ' r- i: PCDF EleCtromcs Umt

E“: ascent and descent phase. The . “l 7, \é

g Process Unit is therefore designed -~ g... ,7 E. ‘1123 ‘

“H; as a standard locker insert to ﬁt in .1 ' l ' x ' F :7?"" 33*: '1‘

:2 the Shuttle’s middeck lockers and . "" .1. l I. » lr‘ H C ~.~ i

E in the EDR lockers. Additionally, \ l 5k :9“ . x. k‘ PCDF Process Unit

8 When a mission is ﬁnished, only ,_ _ _» ,_a ?'\_ ‘” L """"

8 the Process Unit needs to be ‘ ; Wdf‘ﬁu‘“ \ 3‘7”"" _

(3; brought back to Earth and . : y. ""I; w, § ‘ _ ?_j

E launched to the 188 With new ""‘ °' ; \K a ii =

% proteins. The Electronics Unit can ! _ __,LT‘ l ‘3; JA -ﬁ'

9 stay in orbit for several years. ” “:3“ j C”; 7 yuagu . ""u M

(<0: The Process Unit can '3 e} , . E i L"" L: 95‘:

<2: accommodate four experiment k.“ k‘ f ._ -

5 assemblies each containing \MJ,

ﬁg individual protein samples. Once g , ‘ _

% installed in EDR, experimental . ‘ . . . . .

E settings such as temperature can be Flgure 1. The PCDF fac111ty mounted 1n the EDR rack (Englneerlng
modiﬁed separately and each model at Erasmus USOC)’
reactor can be observed With several diagnostics tools. The diagnostics on-board of the PCDF are mounted on the
camera drive and consist of dynamic light scattering (DLS) optics, a Wide ﬁeld of View (WFOV) camera, a
microscope and a Mach-Zehnder-Interferometer (MZI). The camera drive is used to move the optics into the correct
position for observation. At any time only one diagnostic can be used to observe one speciﬁc reactor. Only two of
the four positions can be observed With MZI. Apart from controlling the experiment, the Electronics Unit provides
the data interface to ground — Via EDR, Columbus and 188. The images taken by the WFOV camera, microscope or
MZI are transferred to the Video Management Unit (VMU) of the EDR Where it is possible to store them and
transfer them to ground through the high rate data downlink channel of the 188. The Electronics Unit can control the
experiment through direct commands sent by the operator or through an on-board script.

An experiment assembly consists of the protein reactor and the experiment box. The protein reactor is made of
synthetic quartz glass and contains the protein solution. Apart from the main volume of the reactor Where the protein

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","solution to be investigated is contained, the reactor has two additional volumes which can contain additional protein
solution or precipitant which can be inj ected in the protein volume. The amount of inj ected liquid and the timing are
deﬁned by the science team according to experiment design parameters. The experiment box is composed of a
housing with insulation foam and windows for observation, LEDs for illumination of the reactor, a Peltier element
and temperature sensor for the thermal control, a stirrer to mix the protein solution, an injector piston to inject
solution and the electrical interface.

More detailed information on the PCDF design can be found in Ref. 1 and 2.

III. OperationalConcept

The Electronics Unit was installed in EDR on ground and was launched together with the European Columbus
module during the IE mission (STS-l22) in February 2008. The Process Unit was launched on the ISA ﬂight with
Space Shuttle Discovery (STS-l 19). It was retrieved from the Shuttle Middeck, transferred to and mounted inside

33 EDR by J apanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. After being connected with the Electronics Unit and with EDR for data

a and power resources, ground activities started until the de-installation of the Process Unit during the 2J/A mission

3 (STS—l27) in July 2009. Koichi Wakata transferred it back to Space Shuttle Endeavour, returning the space-grown

g crystals back to Earth for further investigation by the science team.

2. Two of the four reactors installed in the PCDF Process Chamber were dedicated to the study of nucleation,

2' whereas the other two were used to investigate the crystal growth process. With PCDF the science team has the

S possibility to inj ect protein solution or precipitant, to vary the temperature between 4 and 40 degrees Celsius, and to

a) stir the central reactor volume. Therefore, if experiments are designed accordingly, grown crystals can be dissolved

g and the experiment can be started over for a new crystallisation cycle. This technique improves phase diagram

g coverage and data redundancy. For the reactors dealing with nucleation, 6 cycles of about 2.5 days were executed,

53 while the growth cycles lasted for about 8 days and only 4 cycles were planned for each reactor. For each of the

g reactors, the crystals grown in the last cycle were not dissolved, but returned to Earth for post-ﬂight analysis. A

; picture from the post-ﬂight inspection of the space-grown crystals in reactor two is depicted in Fig. 2.

§ Apart from the installation and de-installation which were

”g: performed by the crew, all PCDF activities were controlled

g from the B.USOC either using direct commands from the

“H; operator or by uplinking and activating an on-board script. The

:2 latter is called Command Sequence Table (CST) and is a text , .. -

E ﬁle which contains Tool Command Language (TCL)

8 statements or PCDF Control Language (PCL) commands to be 3;

8 executed by the PCDF software. A CST is uplinked from

(3; ground Via a series of telecommands and only one CST at a ’ 14;.

% time can be saved in the PCDF memory. A CST can be started, w.

a stopped, paused and resumed from ground. $33;

9 All low and medium rate telemetry from PCDF arrived at

(<0: B.USOC through a cascaded link from Erasmus USOC 7

<2: through CD-MCS (Columbus Decentralized Monitoring and Figure 2. Crystals from experimen t box 2

:3 Control System). Erasmus USOC for its part received the data ( t-fl' h t . t ) Th . 1‘ th t l .

§ from the Columbus Control Centre (Col-CC). All data were pos 1g plc ure ' e s1ze 0 e crys a S 1s

% stored in the B.USOC and its Dutch counterpart Erasmus around 0'2 mm.

E USOC High Rate Data Processor (HRDP) archive. Both real-time and archived telemetry were accessible to the
science team and Payload Engineering Support (PBS) Via the User Home Base (UHB) concept, where the telemetry
distribution is done through a USOC developed software called YaMCS Via a secured VPN connection. YaMCS
allows to receive the real-time telemetry (limited according to the speciﬁc data access rights of the user), or to
independently perform a custom telemetry replay from the HRDP archive. Moreover, it allows dumping speciﬁc
telemetry items to a ﬁle for further analysis. The raw images produced by PCDF arrived at Erasmus USOC and were
automatically forwarded to a dedicated folder on a B.USOC shared hard disk, accessible to all involved parties. The
raw images were converted into the Viewable PNG format at B.USOC and were stored in the same folder.
Commanding PCDF was not allowed from the UHB, this was only possible from the B.USOC.

The operational objective of the PCDF PROTEIN mission was to adapt the scientiﬁc conditions in almost real-
time based on on-the-ﬂy analysis of incoming data. This required a speciﬁc near-real-time interaction between the
operators and the science team, each monitoring the experiments from their Viewpoint.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","Additionally, the PCDF PROTEIN experiment involved many parties around the world: the PCDF science team,
mainly located in Granada (Spain) and Brussel (Belgium); the operators at the B.USOC in Brussel (Belgium)
responsible for PCDF, at the Erasmus USOC in Noordwijk (The Netherlands) responsible for EDR, at Col-CC in
Munchen (Germany), at MARS USOC in Napoli (Italy), and at HOSC in Huntsville (United States); the Payload
Developers (PD), Payload Integration Managers (PIM), and Payload Engineering Support (PBS) located at EADS
Astriurn in Friedrichshafen (Germany) for PCDF and at Alenia SIA in Torino (Italy) for EDR; and last but not least
the ESA Payload Operations Managers (ESA-POM) and BSA Mission Science Ofﬁce (ESA-MSO) at ESTEC in
Noordwijk (The Netherlands). The good coordination between all the teams during the preparation and in-ﬂight
periods was another challenge.

IV. Preparation
This part concentrates on the various preparation actiVities performed by the B.USOC operators and the science
53 team to achieve a successful mission.
3.
g A. Flow used.f0r PCDF .
g _F_1g- 3 de131Cts a general OVGYVIGW 0f the ,0T+SciemeTeam+ESA_Mso
g» act1V1ty ﬂow used to prepare the PCDF documents <
S PROTEIN mission. The ﬁgure has to be
as interpreted as follows: items in oval boxes
:0 are operational products whereas items in _ Planning
E rectangular boxes are actiVities. Items on the §§§E§E§ﬂ§ﬁ€§iﬂ$ ""“""“'""""
3 left side of the ﬁgure show the interfaces Gmundsegment
:5 with other partners. As can be seen, the
3% preparation was an iterative process. This _
E subsection gives an overview of the big ﬂow 30:22:23“
8 from box to box as depicted in the ﬁgure, Simulations
2: whereas the following subsections give MCDBvigééﬁon
g detailed information on all the actiVities and few ""mg
E their inﬂuence on the operational products. -
:2 Based on the (ﬁnal) design of the
E instrument and the requirements of the P'anning 039'”
8 science team stated in the Experiment Operatortraining Res°ur°es PCDF Ground segment
8 Scientiﬁc Requirements (ESR), the initial ScienceTeam,Elasmus usoc, <_---_ P I m I u Flowchart
<C - - - PlM,PES,ESA—POM,ESA—MSO ay°a 69” °"" Wham
?A planning inputs, procedures, displays and FlightRule
% ground system could be prepared. With those
% initial products, the iterative process started.
Q Several actiVities such as Mission Data Base
(<5 validation, crew training and science runs
E were performed during which the operational
4: products needed to be evaluated and updated
ﬁg when necessary. At a certain moment in this Planning Display
'3; process, it became clear which ﬂight rules, Resources
3 . Face to Face Meeting Ground segment
5 payload regulations, ground PODFs (Payload <----- PCDF
Operations Data File) and resources were ﬁﬁﬁggﬁgﬂﬂﬁgﬁg‘gb PayloadReguIation Flowmaﬂ Wham
needed for a good completion of the mission. FlightRule 03.6mm
Some months before the launch of the
Process Unit, the Experiment Sequence Test
(EST) was performed. During and after the W
EST execution, it became clear which
operational products needed to be ﬁne-tuned. Figure 3. Overview of activity ﬂow during the PCDF
Last but not least a mission calendar was PROTEIN mission preparation.
prepared.

It is evident that during the whole process close contact was required with the science team, the PIM, and the
Erasmus USOC. Additionally, all other parties needed to be kept up to date on the status and upcoming plans or
actiVities.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","B. The Importance of Science Runs

There were three types of “PCDF-like” instruments available to the science team to prepare the PCDF PROTEIN
mission. The Engineering Model (EM), the Science Reference Model (SRM) and the Lab Model (LM). The EM is
almost identical to the PCDF Flight Model (FM) and can be used inside the EDR EM installed at Erasmus USOC or
integrated in the B.USOC ground support equipment. The SRM is hosted at the B.USOC and contains a process
chamber with optics comparable to the ﬂight model, but without the PCDF ﬂight software. Other soft- and hardware
are used to command and monitor the SRM. The LM is hosted in Granada, is comparable with the SRM, but can
contain only one experiment assembly instead of four.

As protein crystallisation experiments are very sensitive to geometry, size and materials of the reactor,
experimental conditions had to be adjusted for use in PCDF reactors, and the SRM and LM instruments were used
for these preparations. However, there are signiﬁcant differences between the SRM/LM and the EM software, in

g particular with respect to automated operations. Also, the SRM and LM are hands-on instruments run by the science
33 team with support from the B.USOC Science Coordinator, whereas the PCDF Flight hardware can only be operated
i by authorized operators using ﬂight-like procedures. It was therefore Vital to validate experiment ﬂow and timing,
3 CSTs, contingency management and communication procedures between science and operator teams using the
E PCDF EM in a realistic setting. This was done during the science runs. In addition, the science runs produced
g reference data needed to develop and test the on-the-ﬂy “Science Monitoring Tools” developed by the science team.

3 For the operators, the science runs were in the ﬁrst place intended to get acquainted with the PCDF features and
95” to test, set-up, and ﬂne-tune the science ﬂow. Science runs with the EM were executed with the B.USOC ground
§ support equipment and involved the B.USOC operators in close collaboration with PD and PBS frorn Astriurn. The
g science team ﬁlled the reactors and the experiment assemblies were mounted in the PCDF Process Chamber by PD.
3 After installation and activation, a science run could start with PCDF commands sent by the operators. Even in this
5 early stage, the UHB allowed scientists to follow the incoming data live and to replay and download data. The PES
E possessed a UHB as well, making it much easier to answer questions from the operators and to redirect them during
2“ or after an anomaly. The science runs on the EM turned out to be very useful for the operators because next to the
g general hands-on payload familiarization, they were used for procedure preparation and validation, and CST testing
5 and validation.

8 During the preparation of the PCDF PROTEIN rnission, four science runs were performed on the EM. The ﬁrst
é one started in August 2007 and the last one ended in September 2008. They lasted between one and three months
% with quiet periods in between used for evaluation, repairs and refurbishment.

C; Already from the ﬁrst science run some problems rose needing a workaround, an example is the use of time-
EC': tagged commands in CSTs. PCDF allows for time-tagged commands and direct commands. During the science runs
Q it became clear that using the time-tagging feature was not straightforward, as those commands were not always
8 executed on the desired and expected time and sometimes they were even skipped. The science team had to reVise
E their initial approach of using exact command timings by using a relative timing instead.

j: Another unexpected problem was that positioning the camera drive took much longer than originally predicted.
2 This led to the unfortunate loss of parallel observation. PCDF was supposed to be able to observe the nucleation and
E, crystal growth behaviour in the four experiment assemblies in parallel. However, during the science runs it became
g clear that it takes too much time to move the camera to the different positions and the science team concluded to
g concentrate on only one reactor at a time. This had of course a big impact on the science planning as less time
5 became available per reactor. The science team came up with a new plan where science priorities had to be taken
Q into account, and conﬁrmed that the Experiment Science Requirements could still be met.

The science runs were the most appropriate activities for the operators to test and get acquainted with the
mission data base of PCDF and with the instrument behaviour during and after execution of the commands.
Additionally, the operators and the science team could develop a familiarity for the science impact of the commands.
This gave the operators the knowledge to properly accommodate the telemetry displays to the needs speciﬁc to the
experiments planned for the mission. Moreover, the operator and science team started to understand how to operate
PCDF efﬁciently and the operators started to understand how to translate the wishes of the science team into
commands or CST updates. This knowledge was used to develop handy ground PODFs.

Another operational product was based on the experience from a science run, namely the PCDF PROTEIN
thermal clock ﬂight rule. The PCDF Process Unit was to be powered in the Shuttle Middeck during the launch and
until the transfer to EDR to keep the reactors inside at a predeﬁned temperature with monitoring. Only when the
PCDF Process Unit is powered it controls and records the temperature of the Process Chamber. During the transfer
to and installation in EDR, the PCDF Process Unit was — obviously — unpowered and this unpowered time needed to

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","be as short as possible. Therefore during one of the science runs, a test was performed to characterise the thermal
behaViour of the PCDF Process Unit and to deﬁne a thermal clock for the unpowered period. Together with the
science team, the ﬂight rule describing the power constraints was drafted. This was a delicate and difﬁcult process,
since the ﬂight rule had to reﬂect that a thermal clock for power down was deﬁned, but that even when the thermal
clock was exceeded, installation should go on unless something was really preventing the activation in EDR, where
thermal control should then be reassured in the Shuttle Middeck. The reason was that, for the protein samples
selected for this mission, exceeding the thermal clock for a short period would have signiﬁcant effects on
experiments and quality of the data obtained, but samples should not be considered lost as scientiﬁcally relevant
experiments would still be possible. In addition, proper assessment of sample degradation depended on a diagnostic
provided by the PCDF instrument itself (DLS instrument). Obviously, a lot of discussions and time went by before
establishing the correct wording and rules to clarify this to the operational community.
The science runs on the EM resulted in operators and science team getting acquainted with the PCDF commands
and execution; writing and validation of clever ground PODFs; optimized CSTs; creation of the power constraint
Q ﬂight rule and last but not least, an optimal cooperation between the operators and the science team as well as
3 between operators and the PCDF PBS was established.
3 C. Experiment Sequence Test
5 The Experiment Sequence Test (EST) is an end-to-end test performing a complete experiment sequence using
g the ﬂight-like operations set-up and all operational products. It is a pre-requisite for the execution of BSA sponsored
3 experiments on-board the 188. The PCDF EST was set up as a full dry run of the operations for one experiment
95” cycle of the mission. Although the dissolution and execution of a following cycle are part of the on-orbit experiment
§ ﬂow, only one science cycle was performed during the EST which lasted for about one month — mid October till mid
g November 2008. The EST is nevertheless valid as the EST is meant to test mainly the operations part by exercising
E; the main experiment sequences. For PCDF each experiment cycle needs the same PODFs and similar CST’s, which
5 would have made the complete exercise merely a repetitive one. The EST involved the B.USOC, the Erasmus
E USOC, PCDF PBS and PIM, and the science team.
2“ Prior to the EST an operator training was provided to give an overview of the latest status of the operational
g products, to rehearse the complete ﬂow and the instrument behaviour, and to explain the science objectives.
5 As per EST requirements, and different from the science runs, the PCDF EM was installed in the EDR EM at
S Erasmus USOC. In this conﬁguration it was discovered that packet loss occurred between the PCDF and EDR.
é Especially the CST uplink faced difﬁculties. The software and related ground PODF were updated so that the uplink
% could be resumed where it was stuck. Additionally, a test on the FM — already on orbit — was executed at the end of
C; December 2008. The PCDF Electronics Unit was powered on and a CST was uplinked. From this test it was clear
if that the packet loss only occurred on ground with the EM.
2 CST execution during the EST revealed some minor anomalies which were analysed and understood. All CSTs
8 were updated accordingly after the EST and were declared ready for ﬂight execution. After the EST, the science
g team changed a bit the way of handling the different temperature controls of the experiment boxes in the CST,
2 opting for more complicated temperature proﬁles, which caused a real challenge for keeping the automatic recovery
2 plan up-to-date. After some testing on the EM, a solution was found and a plan was drawn using tested and
E approved procedures.
g Not all telemetry received at Erasmus USOC during the EST arrived at the B.USOC and a replay was not
Q possible. For the ﬂight, the science team needed to access the data almost real-time, so this ground problem was
5 resolved before the start of the PCDF PROTEIN mission.
D At the start of the EST, several routine actiVities were planned to be executed daily on a ﬁxed pre-deﬂned time,
just like it would be for the on-orbit execution: two times a day a real time command window of 10 minutes (for the
on-orbit activities, four windows would be scheduled), twice a day an opportunity to uplink a CST and once a day a
PCDF internal table handling. It was shown that only 28% of the ﬁxed actiVities were used during the EST, but
more importantly there was the need to shift the planned actiVities to meet the requests of the science team. This
showed the need for the — already requested, but not yet approved — 24/7 real-time command window to obtain a full
ﬂexibility and optimise the science actiVities. This EST result conVinced the community to approve the 24/7 real-
time command window during the complete PCDF PROTEIN mission. Another requirement arising from the desire
to react on-the-ﬂy was the availability of a 24/7 downlink not only for low and medium rate, but also for high rate
data. The continuous high rate data downlink of 2 megabit per second was not straightforward to obtain, but was
secured before the start of the mission.
For the science team, the EST provided an opportunity to validate the reactor ﬁlling and transport procedures.
During the EST itself, initial data showed the need for more frequent image taking than previously anticipated. In
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","this way, there is always a recent image available giving an overview of the reactor in case of anomalies or doubts.
A few minor anomalies indicated the need for relaxing the timing of the experiments, especially with respect to
injections. Most importantly, the EST confirmed the need for constant ﬁne tuning of experimental conditions during
the ﬂight, and therefore the need for a 24/7 real-time command window. Finally, in View of the bandwidth problems
encountered for transfer between B.USOC and the UHB's, a backup data path was developed where data was
transferred Via a VPN—secured link from HRDP to the Brussel UHB and then forwarded using ssh-encrypted
transfer over standard internet connections to the Granada UHB.

D. Simulations

In preparation of the PCDF PROTEIN mission and as part of the training of the Operations Teams, several kinds
of simulations were performed: stand-alone simulations, European simulations, and Joint Multi Segment Trainings
(J MST). Most of the simulations concentrated on the PCDF activation and de-activation actiVities as the science part
was difﬁcult to simulate and above all, the science part was thoroughly tested for real during the science runs.

g The stand-alone simulations were set up between the B.USOC and the Erasmus USOC only and were used to set
33 up, train and ﬁne-tune the PCDF activation and de-activation ﬂow. Those were the critical, unpowered periods
é requiring a good interaction and understanding between the operators of both USOCs.
3 During the JMSTs, the Shuttle Operations Coordinator (SOC) of NASA was involved. Those simulations proved
E to be very useful to coordinate the several what-if scenarios that could occur during the Shuttle period (from launch
g until transfer to Columbus and back). Through the questions during the simulation, a lot of off—nominal scenarios
3 were passed through and written down. Additionally, the need for a “voice loop coordination’ sheet was drawn up
95“ for the PCDF activation and de-activation. In this way, it was clear for everybody who would contact who at which
§ stage of the ﬂow.
E; E. Operational Experience gained from SOLAR Operations
5 The SOLAR external payload is a European payload installed on the Columbus External Payload Facility
E (CEPF). SOLAR is dedicated to tracking and observing the Sun and hosts three instruments: SolACES, SOLSPEC
2“ and SOVIM. The payload was launched together with the European Columbus laboratory on the IE ﬂight (STS-
g 122) in February 2008, and has been operating since that moment. The characteristics of the SOLAR payload and its
5 operation are further explained in the AIAA SpaceOps 2010 paper “SOLAR Payload Operations: Achieving
E Flexibility to Support a Long Term Science Mission” (Ref. 3).
E The SOLAR operators are the same ones as for the PCDF PROTEIN mission. This gave them one year of real-
% time Columbus-ISS operations experience which undeniably led to a thorough understanding of the complexity and
a different requirements of executing a scientiﬁc experiment on-board the ISS and inside Columbus. This contributed
E to an efﬁcient and clever preparation of the PCDF operational products. A thorough and in depth description of the
2 operational constraints and their consequences when operating a (external) payload on Columbus-ISS is given in the
8 AIAA SpaceOps 2010 paper “Dealing with Operations Constraints for External Payloads on 188” (Ref. 4).
g The most signiﬁcant preparation based on the SOLAR experience was the set up of an automatic recovery plan
j: in case PCDF would reboot spontaneously. As SOLAR from time to time experiences this kind of unwanted reboots,
g a plan to recover PCDF as soon as possible was developed in case this would happen with PCDF as well. When
3 PCDF would reboot, it is important that temperature control for the indiVidual reactors is restored and that the
g correct temperature is reached as soon as possible. As a reboot can happen during a Loss Of Signal (LOS) period, a
g fully automatic recovery method was deVised.
5 Furthermore, several PODFs were created keeping experience and established style and tradition from SOLAR
Q operations in mind. Together with the knowledge gained during the science runs, one long science PODF, including
cross references where needed, was created which should be sufﬁcient to execute all the scientiﬁc requests.

For SOLAR, a daily operations report (DOR) is sent to the different parties involved. It contains information
about the last day, about anomalies, about the archive integrity and it provides an overview of the upcoming
actiVities. Due to the limited duration of the PCDF PROTEIN mission and the subsequently dense schedule, it was
important to create a tool that covered more than what is usually provided in the DOR. The impact of ISS vehicle
trafﬁc, periods of less favorable microgravity conditions, anomalies, unexpected experiment behaviour, reshufﬂing
of science cycles etc, on the overall mission should be available. Therefore together with the ESA Mission Science
Ofﬁce, a PCDF calendar was designed, providing all necessary information for all involved parties.

F. Other Activities

Some weeks before the start of the mission, a face to face meeting was held with the B.USOC, the Erasmus

USOC, the PCDF responsibles of the FCT team, and the ESA Payload Operations Managers. All operational steps
7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"8","were discussed in detail and the way of executing science was explained. During the face to face meeting the need to
create an additional backup for the images by saving them on the EDR VMU was envisaged. The reason behind was
that the continuous and real-time downlink of the PCDF images could not be tested before the start of the PCDF
PROTEIN mission. In this improved procedure all images are also saved on-orbit in the EDR VMU and could be
replayed and downlinked during a period when PCDF would not generate images. This led to a considerable change
in the operations plan and products, but was well worth the effort.

Last but not least, an operational what-if table was prepared for the installation and de-installation actiVities so
that everybody was prepared for every possible anomaly. Additionally, together with the science team and the ESA
Mission Science Ofﬁce, a what-if table was prepared for every possible anomaly affecting the science objectives.

V. On-orbit Execution

In general, the operational on-orbit execution of the PCDF PROTEIN mission went almost perfect: all CSTs

a were executed successfully, the ground PODFs showed to be very ﬂexible and useful, the telemetry and imagery

8 archives are almost complete, and the insight of the working of the PCDF instrument was optimal. This part covers

E mainly the actiVities which were not foreseen to occur during the mission, but which were most of the times quickly

3 resolved thanks to the extensive preparation.

% The on-orbit execution phase started with the launch of STS—l 19 on March 15, 2009. The PCDF Process Unit

2 was continuously powered inside one of the Middeck lockers of Shuttle Discovery until March 20, when PCDF

8 Process Unit was transferred to and installed in EDR by Koichi Wakata and re-activated by the Erasmus USOC

% shortly after. All actiVities were performed smoothly and successfully, except one: the PCDF ﬁber optics cable was

‘3 not correctly installed. This occurred as well during preparatory actiVities on the EM, and therefore the operators

3 were prepared to instruct the crew how to properly align the cable. After two trials, the cable was properly aligned

:5 and the DLS data signal transmission was fine.

g The automatic uplink of the CSTs was interrupted every now and then by micro LOS. Thanks to the update of

g the ground software and related ground PODF during the EST packet loss problems, the uplink could be resumed

§ where it was stuck. Although no packet loss occurred during the on-orbit execution, the established workaround

2: showed to be very useful during the unpredictable micro LOS periods.

§ To support the interpretation of the science results for PCDF, microgravity measurements can play an important

5 role. The closer the measurements are performed to the PCDF instrument the better the interpretation. Therefore the

:2 MicrograVity Measurement Assembly (MMA) equipment of the Fluid Science Lab (FSL) in the Columbus module

E is suitable. This was discussed several times before the start of the mission, but unfortunately no FSL actiVities were

8 planned. The main issue is that for activating FSL, another USOC, MARS USOC hosted in Napoli, needed to staff

8 the console which posed signiﬁcant constraints on the running actiVities and available resources at the MARS

é Center. In the beginning of the mission, the science team and the ESA Payload Operations Manager agreed to

% activate FSL only during the ﬁrst 24 hours of every PCDF growth cycle where microgravity measurements showed

a to be most important for the science team. However, due to the ﬂexible and on-the-ﬂy operation of the PCDF

9 experiment, an early planning of this FSL actiVity was not that straightforward. Due to science changes or science

g interruptions during anomalies, the start of a new cycle could be postponed or moved forward. The daily updated

‘2‘ PCDF calendar proved to be of great value: both the European Planning Team and the operators at MARS USOC

4: used it to know the upcoming PCDF plans. In addition to the FSL MMA measurements, accelerometer data from the

g SAMS/MAMS equipment covering almost the complete month of June became available to the science team.

'3; Almost two weeks after its activation, the ﬁrst PCDF unexpected reboot occurred. The prepared automatic

B . . . .

5 recovery plan was put into action and proved to work to preserve the correct temperature control. It is eV1dent that
the science was interrupted due to the necessity to uplink an updated CST. Most of the times the experiment cycle
could be continued instead of restarted, limiting the science impact. During the 4 months of on-orbit operations,
PCDF rebooted 13 times. Up to now, no reason has been found for this unwanted behaviour of PCDF.

Roughly two weeks after the ﬁrst unexpected PCDF reboot, PCDF was suddenly powered off due to an EDR
ESEM board failure. This ESEM board powers both PCDF Electronics Unit and PCDF Process Unit. The only way
to put EDR and PCDF back to a nominal situation was to power cycle EDR. This recovery mostly took several
hours, during which the active temperature control was lost and the experiment cycles had to restart from scratch.
Therefore the science impact was considerably high. After three re-occurrences and some investigation, it was
decided to replace the failing ESEM board. The crew exchanged the board 45 days after the ﬁrst failure. During the
re-activation of PCDF after the ESEM board replacement, an untested combination of PCDF Electronics and
Process Unit power-ups resulted in a very fast cooling of the Process Chamber temperature. Fortunately, the

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"9","temperature control could be recovered fairly quickly. Until now the inﬂuence on the experiment is not known.
After the board replacement, no ESEM board failures occurred anymore.

As agreed just before the mission, all images would be recorded on the EDR VMU together with the real time
downlink. Roughly halfway the mission, the VMU hard disk was full because the CSTs produced more images than
originally foreseen. As some images were missing or incomplete, all VMU records were replayed completing the
image archive as best as possible before erasing the full disk. Just before the end of the mission, the second part of
the VMU records was replayed. Thanks to those redundancy actions, the science team possesses 99.2% of the
~42000 images taken during the entire PCDF PROTEIN mission.

Roughly one month before the end of the mission, the motor of the radial camera drive got stuck. Luckily the
position allowed covering a considerable and useful part of the experiment boxes. Together with the science team it
was decided to take no risk and to continue the experiment run without changing the radial motor position deferring
the troubleshooting until the PCDF Process Unit was back on ground. The CSTs were adapted to not use the radial
motor anymore and to limit the other camera movements as much as possible to reduce the risk of additional motor

Q failures. Fortunately, no other motor failures occurred and imagery of the status of all experiment boxes could be
g obtained. The on-ground troubleshooting revealed that the shaft of the radial motor is broken due to fatigue.

é Shortly before and during the entire mission a bi-weekly teleconference was held between the ESA Mission
3 Science Ofﬁce, the science team, the B.USOC, and the ESA Payload Operations Manager. When needed also a
E representative of the Erasmus USOC and the PCDF PIM/PES was attending the meeting. During those meetings an
:- overview of the past activities was given and information on previous or upcoming activities inﬂuencing the PCDF
a science planning was provided. Together with all parties, the upcoming activities were discussed and agreed on.
95“ Those meetings proved to be very useful to keep everybody up to date and to make sure the overall science
§ objectives were protected.

:3; VI. Conclusion

3 The meticulous preparation of the PCDF PROTEIN mission ensured an almost perfect operational on-orbit
§ execution of the PCDF PROTEIN mission. The rewards of this extensive preparation were harvested during the
E: nominal operations as well as during anomaly containment and recovery. For the latter one, this resulted in a
g minimum loss of experiment execution, maximum sample protection and successful data recovery. It is shown in
5 this paper that the enormous ﬂexibility provided by the operators to the science team and Vice versa together with
:2 the meticulous preparation are one of the most important keystones that led to the successful execution of the PCDF
E PROTEIN mission. It can be concluded that the general approach used for the preparation and execution of the
(L3 PCDF PROTEIN mission could prove useful for similar future missions and could help facilitate increased science
8 return.

é

% Acknowledgments

% The authors would like to thank the B.USOC, Erasmus USOC and MARS Center Operator teams, the BSA
9 Payload Operations Management (ESA-POM), the ESA Mission Science Ofﬁce (ESA-MSO), the Payload
i Engineering Support teams, the Science Teams, the Payload Integration Manager, the Columbus Control Centre
i Flight Control Team (Col-CC FCT) and the Huntsville Operations Support Center (HOSC) for their good
g collaboration and support.

’3 A special word of thanks goes to the ESA USOC Management, the National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR)
E management, the B.USOC Management and the Space Applications Services Management for their close
5 cooperation and for providing the budget and personnel for the activities.

The PCDF PROTEIN experiment is funded and undertaken by ESA's Directorate of Human Spaceﬂight
(D/HSF) in the context of its European Programme for Life and Physical Science in Space (ELIPS) and by the
Belgian Science Policy Ofﬁce (BELSPO). B.USOC is part of the Services & Operations Division of the Belgian
Institute for Space Aeronomy (BISA) and is funded through the ESA ProdeX and other programs by BELSPO.
B.USOC and Space Applications Services are funded by the ESA’s Exploitation Programme.

References

1Pletser, V., Bosch, R., Potthast, L., Lautenschlager, P., Kassel, R., “The Protein Crystallisation Diagnostics Facility (PCDF)
on Board ESA Columbus Laboratory,” Microgravily Science and Technology, Vol. 21, No. 3, Jul. 2009, pp. 269-277.

2Pletser, V., Minster, 0., Bosch, R., Potthast, L., Stapelrnann, J ., “The protein crystallisation diagnostics facility: status of the
ESA programme on the fundamentals of protein crystal growth,” Journal of Crystal Growth, Vol. 232, Issue 1-4, Nov. 2001, pp.
439-449.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"10","3Bramtschem, 8., Michel, A., “SOLAR Payload Operations: Achieving Flexibility to Support Long Term Science Mission,”
AIAA Journal, (submitted for publication).
4Wislez, J .-M., Michel, A., “Dealing with Operations Constraints for External Payloads on 188,” AIAA Journal, (submitted
for publication).
3.
O
§.
9
E
33.
S
5'
Q
E
Q
g
ct;
E
E
g
5
Nu
E“
(<3
G
O
m
Lu
P
%
0
Lu
0
<3
95
Z
o
E
Q
<:
m
<:
Z
5‘
""O
%
L3
Q
B
O
Q
10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
