"","x"
"1","Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
@ Pergamon @
SCIENCE DIRECT.
www.elsevier.com/locate/asr , PII: 80273-1177(02)00751-2
FARMING IN SPACE: ENVIRON MENTAL AN D BIOPHYSICAL
C ONC ERN S
0. Monje‘, G. w. Stuttel, G. D. Goinsl, D. M. Porterﬁeld2‘3 and G. E. Bingham“
[Dynamac Corporation, Kennedy Space Center, FL 32780, USA
2Department ofBz'ological Sciences, University of Missouri-Rolla, MO, USA
3Department ofElectrz'cal and Computer Engineering, University ofMissouri-Rolla, MO, USA
4Plants, Soils & Biometeorology Dept, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84321, USA
ABSTRACT

The colonization of space will depend on our ability to routinely provide for the metabolic needs (oxygen, water,
and food) of a crew with minimal re-supply from Earth. On Earth, these functions are facilitated by the cultivation
of plant crops, thus it is important to deveIOp plant-based food production systems to sustain the presence of
mankind in space. F arming practices on earth have evolved for thousands of years to meet both the demands of an
ever-increasing population and the availability of scarce resources, and now these practices must adapt to
accommodate the effects of global warming. Similar challenges are expected when earth-based agricultural
practices are adapted for space-based agriculture. A key variable in space is gravity; planets (e.g. Mars, 1/3 g) and
moons (e.g. Earth’s moon, 1/6 g) differ from spacecraft orbiting the Earth (e.g. Space stations) or orbital transfer
vehicles that are subject to microgravity. The movement of heat, water vapor, C02 and 02 between plant surfaces
and their environment is also affected by gravity. In microgravity, these processes may also be affected by reduced
mass transport and thicker boundary layers around plant organs caused by the absence of buoyancy dependent
convective transport. Future space farmers will have to adapt their practices to accommodate microgravity, high
and low extremes in ambient temperatures, reduced atmospheric pressures, atmospheres containing high volatile
organic carbon contents, and elevated to super-elevated C02 concentrations. Farming in space must also be carried
out within power-, volume-, and mass-limited life support systems and must share resources with manned crews.
Improved lighting and sensor technologies will have to be developed and tested for use in space. These
developments should also help make crop production in terrestrial controlled environments (plant growth chambers
and greenhouses) more efﬁcient and, therefore, make these alternative agricultural systems more economically
feasible food production systems. © 2002 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
INTRODUCTION

The colonization of space rests on our ability to provide adequate life support to a crew of space colonists.
This means providing for all the biological needs of the crew: e.g. food, water, oxygen, and essential nutrients. A
brief historical review of farming is presented to illustrate how changes in Earth-based agricultural methods have
occurred over long periods of time. Modern agriculture has become increasingly dependent on technology to keep
up with the demands of an increasing population and space-based farming research can help in the continued
development of new technologies for increasing food production on Earth.
EARLY AGRICULTURE

Agriculture probably began in the Neolithic age (c. 8000 B.C.), when domestication of wild varieties of crops
and animals allowed groups of hunters/gatherers to develop sedentary agrarian societies. Domestication occurred
near several centers of origin around the world where wild plants with useful hereditary traits were gradually
selected to develop improved varieties of cr0p plants. Several changes in plant phenotypes were 56160th for:
determinate growth habit, reduced grain shattering, shorter maturity, synchronous ripening, reduced bitterness and
Adv. Space Res. Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 151—167, 2003 '
© 2002 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
Printed in Great Britain
0273-1177/03 $22.00 + 0.00

"
"2","152 O. Monje et al.
toxin content; reduced seed dispersal, sprouting and dormancy; increased fruit size and productivity. These traits
increased usefulness to society but reduced survivability of these crops in the wild (Prakash, 2001).

The development of traditional agricultural farming practices has been a gradual process whereby cultures
adapt their cultural techniques to their local terrain and climate. Early civilizations began along major rivers: the
Egyptians near the Nile river, the Harappa along the Indus, the Chinese along the Huang river and the
Mesopotamians (Sumerians, Babylonians, and Assyrians) along the Tigris and Euphrates. These rivers provided a
source of silt from yearly ﬂoods and plentiful water. The Harappa established a large-scale crop production system
in the fertile plains of the Indus around 3000 BC. (Stamp, 1961). They used dams and drainage systems, and
practiced terracing to produce wheat, barley, sesame and dates. In Mesopotamia, agriculture was entirely dependent
on the efﬁciency of the irrigation system. The main crops were wheat, barley, dates, ﬁgs, olives and grapes. The
Tigris and Euphrates rivers brought large amounts of silt, which clogged man made irrigation systems. The yearly
ﬂoods came in late spring /early summer, which was too late for the spring crop and too early for the autumn crops
(Grigg, 1974). There was also a high saline content in the soil, and the yearly rainfall was not sufﬁcient for crOps
(Gill and Dale, 1974). These conditions resulted in food shortages whenever the irrigation ditches were not
maintained.

Early man occupied many climatic zones and, as a result, developed many cultural practices to accommodate
these different zones (Stamp, 1961). In East Africa, coffee, sorghum, millet and watermelon Were domesticated,
and farmers used grinding wheels and sickles (Harlan, 1971). In Egypt, the Nile brought fertile silt and humus
deposits in yearly ﬂoods. The Egyptians invented the water wheel to allow them to grow two crops per year, and
the shaduf to ‘pump’ water into their irrigation canals (Leonard, 1973). The Egyptians constructed large dikes and
irrigation systems to regulate the yearly ﬂoods (Stamp, 1961) and developed drainage (water removal), irrigation
(artiﬁcial supply of water), and land preparation (hoeing and plowing) techniques. The Greeks had to accommodate
to mountainous terrain. They used terracing and farmed in hills to grow their crops (Gill and Dale, 1974). They also
studied plant function. Theophrastus published a botanical study describing 500 plants, provided the ﬁrst insights
into plant function and studied pollination, propagation, and classiﬁcation. In Mesoamerica, the American Indian
civilizations (Olmec, Aztec, Inca, Maya, and others) were perhaps the best plant domesticators. In Central America,
the main agricultural practice in poor jungle soils was slash and burn. The ashes of the native vegetation provided
sufﬁcient nutrients for crops (Crisp, 1993), but the ﬁelds had to be left fallow once the nutrients were depleted. The
main crops were maize, squash, pumpkins, chili peppers, and avocados (Harlan, 1971).

New cultures have developed new approaches as well as improved upon what previous cultures have done in
the past. In the Andes, the Pucaras, Quechuas and Aymaras, living in the Lake Titicaca Basin at altitudes above
3800 m employed raised ﬁeld culture from 1000 BC. to 400 AD. Raised ﬁelds increased soil fertility, improved
drainage, and improved the local micro~climate to reduce the risk of frost damage and thereby maximize crop
yields (Erickson, 1988). Potato and quinoa were grown in raised ﬁelds surrounded by 1 m deep and 10 m wide
canals. The water in the canals stored heat during the day and radiated it at night to minimize frost damage, which
improved root zone and air temperatures. In recent tests, the unfertilized raised ﬁelds produced an average potato
yield of 10 metric tons per hectare compared to the current regional average yield of 4 metric tons per hectare in
conventional fertilized ﬁelds. In Europe, the Romans inherited many cultural practices from people they conquered.
They understood that the soil becomes depleted if not fertilized and developed the concept of crop rotation (Gill
and Dale, 1974). They fertilized with manure and conserved water from rainfall for use when water was scarce in
the summer. They studied budding and grafting, used cultivated varieties, legume rotation, and developed
greenhouses.

Improvements in farming have targeted new ways to reduce the amount of labor needed to sustain a given
population for a given area to be farmed. The greatest advancements in farming have been achieved since the
Industrial Revolution as mechanization replaced manual labor. The new mechanized methods (plow, reaper, seed
drill) powered by horses and oxen combined with crop rotation, fertilization with manure, the use of New World
crops, and better soil preparation led to a steady increase in crop yield in Europe (Grigg, 1974). In 1910, a farmer
could feed 7 people, by 1982, a farmer could feed 80 people. Production from the 1880’s to the 1920’s increased
due to expanded use of available land, and from the 1920’s until the present yield increases have been fueled by
advancements in technology (chemical fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides, growth regulators, use of plastics in
nurseries and greenhouses, hydroponic culture) as well as improved plant breeding programs (Janick et al., 1981;
Huxley, 1984).

"
"3","Space Farming 153
MODERN AGRICULTURE '

Agriculture has converted millions of acres of forested land around the world, and introduced numerous alien
plant species into natural ecosystems in the pursuit of food, ﬁber, and timber, causing large disruptions to the ﬂora
and fauna of the planet. There have also been many impacts On crop biodiversity, as well as on air, water and soil
quality; however, food has been adequately provided for the world’s population (Prakash, 2001). Farming has kept
pace With the population explosion of the last century mostly through scientiﬁc crOp improvement methods (such as
hybrid vigor, shortening growing seasons, developing greater resistance to diseases and pests, developing bigger
seeds and fruits, and breeding for better digestibility and nutn'tion and for reduced toxins). These scientiﬁc cr0p
improvements were bolstered by improved methods of irrigation, mechanization and disease control (Conway,
1999)

The challenge of modern agriculture lies in sustaining high production rates while coping with new challenges
brought about by changes in the global climate: increased frequency of extreme weather events, increased demand
for water resources, increased pest and disease problems as global temperatures increase. In conventional
agriculture, the climate limits yearly crop production to one season because year-round farming is not possible
except in certain tropical and subtropical regions of the world (Dalrymple, 1973). Further increases in crop yields,
far exceeding those attained in ﬁeld settings, have only recently been achieved in controlled environments
(greenhouses and small plant growth chambers) optimized for use in future space farms (Salisbury and Bugbee,
1988). Although the degree to which the environment can be manipulated is considerable in greenhouses and plant
growth chambers, these systems are limited by economic considerations related to the costs of controlling
temperature, light intensity and spectral quality, atmospheric composition, and the rooting medium (Dalrymple,
1973)

PLANTS AND ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS

In nature, plants play a central role for mankind because we are entirely dependent on agriculture for food.
What should be the role of plant-based food production as we venture into space? Myers (1963) developed a
graphical method of conducting trade studies among the various options available for providing life support in
space in terms of initial launch mass. The simplest option, stowage and periodic resupply of consumables without
recycling, has been used in all manned missions to date. The initial launch mass increases linearly as mission
duration or distance from the Earth increases because the cost to launch consumables is nearly constant. Adding life
support hardware for recycling water, for regenerating the atmosphere or for food production increases the initial
launch mass, but decreases the need to resupply consumables. Thus, the rise in launch mass with mission duration
is not as steep. Breakeven points between various degrees of recycling and the simplest option can be used to
evaluate the feasibility of numerous physicochemical and bioregenerative technologies in providing sustained life
support. The most efﬁcient designs of regenerative life support systems combine both physicochemical and plant-
based systems (Olson etal., 1988; Schartzkopf, 1992). Crop plants produce food for the crew, regenerate the air by
removing C02 and producing 02, and purify water through transpiration. The remaining functions: food and waste
processing, and temperature control can be accomplished with physicochemical systems. These hybrid plant-based
bioregenerative systems become economically feasible compared to the simple resupply option after a 3—year, six
crew-member mission (Drysdale, 2001), which coincides with the duration of a Mars mission.

The diet requirements of humans dictates that up to 15 species of plants must be grown to ensure a complete
menu (Olson et al., 1988). These crops must be selected for small size, fast growth, nutrition, short plant cycles, and
high harvest indices. However, these traits only address the food production aspects of the crops. Other aspects
must include atmosphere and water recycling capabilities. These considerations require characterizing
physiological responses of these crops to numerous environmental parameters before they can be deployed as part
of a bioregenerative life support system (Muhlestein et al., 2000; Stutte et al., 1999; Goins et al., 1998; Monje and
Bugbee, 1998; Monje, 1998; Wheeler et al., 1993; Wheeler et al., 1994; Bonsi et al., 1992). Once a crop is
characterized, this knowledge can be used to throttle water or CO; recycling by simple environmental changes in
atmospheric CO; concentration or light intensity (Wheeler et al., 2001). The performance of plants in microgravity
must also be studied (Levinskikh et al., 2001; Monje et al., 20000; Brown et al., 1997; Tripathy et al., 1996;
Morrow et al., 1995; Morrow et al., 1993), but much more work is needed because there have been very few long
duration plant experiments in space to date. The main goals of these studies should be to develop the appropriate
technologies and cultural conditions for providing stress-free plant growth in microgravity.

"
"4","154 O. Monje et a1.
FARMING IN SPACE

The goals of the space farmer are to provide food for human crews living in microgravity aboard spacecraft or
in planetary bases. Thus, Earth-based cultural practices and crops must be adapted to grow optimally in new
environments with new biophysical combinations (e.g. microgravity, low atmospheric pressures, and supra-elevated
C02 concentrations) encountered only in space. The process of adaptation to new environments will be no different
than what farmers have done in the past as new environments on Earth were colonized. The space farm modules
will be built as ﬂight hardware because they will be used by manned-crews in space. However, there are vast
differences between spacecraft and planetary bases in terms of the resources available for farming and in the
constraints that must be accommodated. Therefore, farming in space will be conducted in controlled environment
chambers of varying sizes and power demands depending on the amount of local resources available. These
chambers will provide programmable levels of light, air temperature, relative humidity, and carbon dioxide. They
will also provide adequate ventilation and automated water/nutrient delivery systems to sustain plant growth.
Space Farms on Spacecraft

Space farms in microgravity will most likely be constrained to supplementing the dietary requirements of
crews during short-term missions (MacElroy et al., 1992). Spacecraft like the ISS offer limited volume, mass and
power for farming. Small payload launch masses of current heavy lift vehicles and an inefﬁcient power supply by
arrays of solar cells impose spartan resources for food production. Thus, resources are primarily used for crew life
support and maintaining the spacecraft in a stable orbit. Little crew time for processing and cooking crops is likely
so that initial efforts at space farming will probably provide just a few fresh foods; this concept has often been
referred to as a salad machine (MacElroy et al., 1992). Salad crops (i.e. lettuce, radish, tomato, carrots, onions, and
cabbage) that can be picked by hand and eaten fresh are prime candidates for supplementing crew diets in
microgravity. The Vitacycle is a prototype greenhouse concept for microgravity (Berkovich et al., 1997). It consists
of a rotating inner cylinder containing ten plant troughs where plants are seeded periodically and harvested after 30
days. The rotating cylinder is contained within a lamp bank housing arranged in the shape of a spiraling cylinder,
which holds lamps 80m over the ﬁrst plant trough and 30cm over the tenth trough. The light level is 270 umol m'2
s"", the lighting area is 1.1 m2 and the planted area is 0.48 m2.

Space Farms on Planetary Surfaces

In contrast to space vehicle systems, planetary bases are envisioned as being composed of large modules
where larger growing areas and potentially larger power budgets could be available. In this case, more conventional
controlled environment farming of staple crops (wheat, soybean, potato, sweet potato, and rice) could be sustained,
provided there is adequate lighting either from direct solar light, or electric lighting systems. However, use of
electric lighting systems would require sufﬁcient power, which may be supplied by nuclear power plants. These
bases would have the added beneﬁt of some gravity, e.g., 1/6 g on the Moon or 1/3 g on Mars. Gravity makes the
use of hydroponic systems more feasible by providing gravity-driven drainage capabilities, alleviating such
problems as the degassing of ﬂuids in microgravity and the need for triple containment of water in space vehicles,
and allows better moisture distribution near the roots of the crops (Wright et a1, 1988). In addition, planetary bases
can make use of important local resources such as regolith, water (on Mars and possibly the poles of the Moon),
and C02 (Mars), which all defray some of the energy and mass costs required for farming in space. Regardless of
the location, the future space farm will have to accommodate many of the mass and volume constraints imposed on '
current ﬂight experiments and technologies designed for STS and 188 missions.

Another environmental factor that must be considered for space farming systems is the total atmospheric
pressure. Reduced pressures can reduce gas leakage and structural mass costs for both vehicle and surface systems
(Andre and Massimino, 1992), but the ability to manage environments at low pressure and thorough understanding
of its effects on plants (crops) are needed. Several studies have shown that plants can grow well at reduced
pressures, but that transpiration rates can increase (Andre and Massimino, 1992; Daunicht and Brinkjans, 1992). If
very low pressures are used, e.g., <50 kPa, then human access to the plant growing areas would likely require some
protective suits or assistance. In spite of this, it still might be advantageous to use such low pressure for economic
reasons, and lower pressure structures may use transparent materials for direct solar lighting; in other words,
increase the potential for building “greenhouse” like structures (Wheeler and Martin-Brennan, 2000). Maintaining
adequate 02 levels for the plants at reduced pressures may pose a challenge, particularly for managing the root-
zone. Likewise, the tendency for higher evaporation rates and reduced ability to convectively transfer heat may
pose challenges for maintaining acceptable humidity and temperature control.

"
"5","Space Farming 155
DESIGNING THE SPACE FARM

Flight hardware is built to ensure crew safety and to operate reliably. However, power, mass, and volume
constraints, as well as limited crew time dedicated to spaceﬂight-rated plant growth systems can indirectly affect
their performance because limited resources constrain engineering solutions available to the designers of these
systems. Furthermore, these payloads must also provide atmospheric control of C02 and ethylene, and adequate
ventilation and cooling, which are necessary in an optimal environment conducive to stress-ﬁ'ee plant growth.

Several tenets for designers of life support systems for the space environment were identiﬁed recently (Graf et
al., 2001). Mong the numerous challenges in developing microgravity-cohipatible life support equipment, the lack
of buoyancy-driven convection is prominent because it impacts processes utilizing phase separation (solid, liquid,
and gas), heat transfer. Other challenges are the requirements for triple containment of loose particulate matter and
liquids and for noise reduction hardware (i.e. mufﬂers) to protect the crew. Heat transfer and heat rejection are
probably the most important of these factors because most life support hardware generates large amounts of heat
(i.e. motors, pumps, lamps, computers) that can be coupled to circulation loops of cooled liquid (when available).
The heat rejection system will always represent a signiﬁcant portion of a ﬂight environmental control system and
will consume much of the available power when precise thermal control is required. Typically, high cabin air
temperatures result in spacecraft because most heat is dissipated into cabin air, and temperatures within the
hardware can be several degrees above that due to poor heat rejection (Graf et 31., 2001).

Many of these tenets were utilized in the design of the Biomass Production System (BPS). This plant growth
hardware was designed by Orbitec (Madison, WI) and was used during the Photosynthesis Experiment and System
Testing and Operation (PESTO) spaceﬂight experiment launched on STS 110 to the ISS and returned to Earth on
STS-lll, a 73—day mission. This mission represented an incredible opportunity to test the performance and
integration of several hardware components, as well as for implementing numerous science protocols. The
knowledge gained during the PESTO experiment suggests that the following tenets also need to be incorporated
into future designs: 1) use of multiple redundant chambers to maximize both yield and allow for the necessary
ﬂexibility to deal with anomalies, 2) crew accessible ports for maintaining critical systems (e.g. for repriming
humidity control systems or for replacing fans), 3) redundant fans and circuitiy for ensuring that airﬂow is not
interrupted, 4) anemometers for monitoring the amount of ventilation in the chamber, 5) infrared temperature
sensors or cameras for monitoring plant temperature, and 6) modifying current NDS systems for controlling root
zone temperature. The implementation of these additional tenets would increase hardware reliability, which can
directly affect optimal plant growth, as well as assure that maximum crew time could be allocated to science related
operations such as planting and harvesting.

Other design tenets stress thorough testing of individual components as well as integration of the entire system
prior to ﬂight. This ensures that sensors, software, and control systems operate reliably because of the limited
availability of crew time for maintaining a ﬂight system or changing software in space. Maintaining small
experiments in space is frequently more expensive than the total cost for designing and manufacturing the ﬂight
hardware itself (Graf et al., 2001). These concerns also extend to the need to minimize consumables because of the
large costs for resupply from Earth. Considering human factors and human interfaces early in the design is also
important, since humans and hardware are typically in close proximity within the spacecraft. Another important
factor affecting mission success is testing communications and interactions between teams of scientists, hardware
developers, payload managers and mission managers. This last tenet is often overlooked although it plays a central
role in the day to day planning of the mission because it impacts crew time allotment and the time required to repair
and mitigate the impact of hardware anomalies that may arise.

DESIGNING ROOT ZONES (NUTRIEN T DELIVERY SYSTEMS) FOR SPACE

. The Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board (ASEB, 1997) evaluated programs that will apply to NASA'S
long-term goals and the eventual human exploration of space. Recommendation 2—13 (p. 53) explicitly states that
""plant research should focus on resolving issues unique to growing plants in controlled environments for space
applications. Some of these issues include optimization of environmental conditions during different periods of
plant growth to increase production efﬁciency as well as techniques for providing aerobic, well- watered root zones
to reduce plant stress"". Adequate root zone aeration ensures that soil stmcture does not limit root respiration
through a reduction in the oxygen supply to the external surface of plant roots (Lemon, 1961). The oxygen
concentration in the root zone environment is determined by the supply of oxygen to the rooting media and the
consumption by roots and microbial populations in the rhizosphere. In agricultural systems, both supply and
consumption vary with soil type, water status, crop, root zone temperature, and organic content (De Willigen and
Van Noordwijk, 1984).

"
"6","156 O. Monje et al.

It is well known that ﬂooding the air~ﬁ11ed pore space of soil results in roots suffering severe oxygen
deﬁciency. Prolonged ﬂooding reduces growth and causes epinasty, leaf chlorosis and death, and the development
of adventitious roots near the water line. Root elongation stops and mineral absorption are also reduced (Kramer
and Boyer, 1995). Although injury to roots in ﬂooded soil has been attributed to the accumulation of products of
anaerobic respiration (aldehydes, organic acids, and ethanol), acidiﬁcation of the cytOplasm is probably responsible
for inj my in root tips in response to hypoxia. Hypoxia can be common at ambient oxygen concentrations, especially
in large diameter meristems, and can be detected by measurements of metabolic indicators of hypoxia such as
alanine, ethanol, lactic acid, and elevated activities of ADH and pyruvate decarboxylase (Bidel et al., 2000).

Plant stress is often avoided in NASA crop yield ground studies in recirculating hydroponic systems (Wheeler
et al., 1996), but these systems are difﬁcult to implement in microgravity (Wright et al., 1988). Hydroponic nutrient
delivery systems (NDS) are more apprOpriate for planetary surface applications because they are more massive (Le.
pumps, tubing, large water volumes) and are susceptible to ﬂuid handling problems (i.e. gas-liquid phase
separation) in microgravity. A major concern to designers of microgravity plant growth systems is simultaneously
providing plant roots with ample water and oxygen. Because of the triple containment requirements of liquids that
must be met to prevent the release of water into the cabin environment of manned spacecraft, substrate-based NDS
that supply water on-demand have been used in space.

Solid substrates are currently preferred for long-term ﬂight experiments because they provide a large speciﬁc
volume for water transfer to the root zone, and can be made mechanically simple and reliable. Avoidin g plant stress
caused .by poor aeration of the root zone has proven a difﬁcult task to achieve in these systems; however, the
shallow, substrate—based NDS system used in the PESTO experiment has demonstrated that high germination rates
and stress-free plant growth in microgravity can be achieved reliably and repeatedly.

Planetary Surface: Hydroponic NDS Systems

CrOp performance in recirculating hydroponic systems is strongly dependent on dissolved 02 concentration
(DOC), pH, and nutrient content of the hydroponic solution. Dissolved 02 concentration is strongly dependent on
solution temperature and ﬂow rate near the root zone, as well as on the growth rate of the crop, and may be
inﬂuenced by the bacterial community present in the solution (Monje, Garland, and Stutte, 2000). Solution
temperature determines the solubility of 02 in water, which is 10 mg/L at 15°C and decreases to 6.9 mg/L at 35°C.

Control of solution temperature may become a limiting factor in these NDS systems when the solution volume
is minimized to reduce overall system mass. As solution volume decreases, the solution temperature may increase
due to heating by the pumps employed to circulate the solution. Signiﬁcant reductions in mass are possible by
reducing the height of the solution bathing the root zone, as exempliﬁed by systems using the nutrient ﬁlm
technique (NFT). In space, smaller volumes are preferred, but shallow root zones can become very dense and limit
solution ﬂow rates. These factors may lead to the development of anaerobic pockets where N losses by
denitriﬂcation can take place, but yield reductions will not occur while the DOC being supplied to the rootzone is
above a critical threshold of oxygen supply (Lemon and Wiegand, 1961; Letey etal., 1962). Bacterial communities
may also compete with plants for the same pool of DOC, especially when the NDS is used for recycling gray water
streams.

Microgravity: Substrate-Based NDS Systems

Substrate-based NDS systems (Figure 1) are simpler than aeroponic or hydroponic systems for use in space
because they avoid many ﬂuid—handling problems encountered in microgravity G’eterson et al., 1991; Dreschel and
Sager, 1989). On Mir, wheat was successfully grown from seed to seed to seed using the Balkanine substrate of the
Russian SVET Greenhouse (Sychev etal., 1999; Levinskikh et al., 2001). However, avoiding plant stress caused by
poor aeration of the root zone has proven a difﬁcult task to achieve in these systems, as evidenced from
measurements of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) activity, an indicator of root zone hypoxia (Porterﬁeld et al.,
1997a). ADH activity was signiﬁcantly higher in spaceﬂight roots of Arabidopsis (CHOMEX-3 and CHROMEX-S;

Porterﬁeld et al., 1997b), wheat and Brassica (Astroculture-4; Morrow et al., 1995; Porterﬁeld et al., 2000b) when
compared to ground controls.

Nutrient supply is further simpliﬁed in substrates because nutrients can be provided by either a nutrient
solution or may be present in the solid substrate. The use of nutrient-rich substrates or slow release fertilizers avoids
the need to supply a complete nutrient solution to the root modules because transpired water can be recycled into
the root module. Thus, crew time to mix fresh replenishment solutions or the need to recirculate the solution in
order to prevent development of low nutrient patches in the media are avoided.

"
"7","Space Farming 157
@ﬁgw - :‘~ ”R Water for most space substrate-based NDS is delivered through
Y .1 ,. ...’ porous tubes made of sintered metal (with pores ranging from 2-30
1’ % ME M, ‘ "" pm) or through drip irrigation tubing. The substrates most
’ "" ,-2 . ‘- commonly used in recent ﬂight experiments have been nutrient
,. L V , . "" ~ zeoponic and a mixture of arcillite with Osmocote (14-14—14 N-P-K
. ' slow release fertilizer), because they provide the necessary nutrients
_ _ . for plant growth. A major difference between these two nutrient-
' ' ’ ‘_ ' . rich substrates is that zeoponic substrates provide ammonia—N, and
J g , V, .. ,- j . . arcillite/Osmocote mix provides both ammonia-N and nitrate-N
' ' V (Goins et 31., 1997b).
"" , ,, The particle size of the substrates used in space has ranged from
1"" <O.5 mm to >5 mm, although the most commonly used particle
Fig. 1- Substrate-based. .3133 1001 modnle sizes in spaceﬂight experiments have been 0.5-1 mm (zeoponic) and
containing 1'? mm arcnlllte/Osmocote mux. 1-2 mm (arcillite). The smaller particle sizes have higher hydraulic
Water IS . dellvered through porous tubes conductances, however, they require the NDS systems to operate at
made of snntered metal. . . .
greater suctlon (lower matnc potentIals) and they also have lower
air-ﬁlled porosity (Jones and Or, 1998a). The matric potentials used to grow plants in recent and ongoing
experiments range between -0.5 kPa and ~0.3 kPa; however, the volumetric moisture content in the root zone will
depend on the hydraulic properties and the pore size of the substrate used.
Nutrients A 100
The amount and type of nutrients present in a 9?: 30
substrate—based NDS may have a large impact on plant E 60 N
growth. Ground studies conducted at the Kennedy ‘5
Space Center (KSC) in support of the PESTO ISS -E 4°
ﬂight experiment have measured the nutrient levels in 3 2° .
the substrate-based NDS of the Biomass Production 0 0
System. The seed germination of wheat cv. 0 4 8 12 16
Supeerarf was found to be sensitive to the Osmocote Concentration (91 L)
concentration of slow release fertilizer (Osmocote) in
the media (Figure 2). A 30% increase in germination Fig. 2. Germination of wheat cv Supeerarf is sensitive
was obtained as the Osmocote concentration was to the Osmocote (slow release fertilizer) concentration in
reduced from 15 g/L to 5 g/L (Stutte et a1., 2000). In arCIIIIte.
other ground studies at KSC, biomass production of
spinach and radish in zeoponic substrate was lower than in hydroponic systems fed With nitrate-N (Goins et a1.,
1998). In contrast, lettuce was not affected by N-form. The reduction in growth was attributed to a decrease in root
zone pH below 5.0, caused in response to the predominantly NH4-N form in the zeoponic substrate (Allen et a1.,
1995). These effects of lower pH on crop growth may have also occurred because pH was not controlled in these
studies (Muhlestein et a1., 2000). The increased NH4-N form was also responsible for increased tillering of wheat
grown in zeoponic substrates (Goins et a1., 1997b).
Moisture Distribution in Root Modules in Microgravity
Studies conducted in substrate-based root modules deployed in space have led to great insight into ﬂuid
behavior in porous media (Jones and Or, 19983; J ones and Or, 1998b; Podolsky and Mashinsky, 1994). The wetting
and drying substrate water retention curves in Balkanine, a nutrient—charged zeoponic substrate, were characterized,
and soil moisture data from the SVET root module was used to model and compare water distribution between
microgravity and 1g (Figure 3). In space, water distributes in concentric circles around the water supply tubes due
to capillary forces. In 1g, water drains to the bottom of the root module due to the pull of gravity. Measurements of
canopy evapotranspiration on Mir using an open gas exchange system indicated that stomata of plants did not close
at night in microgravity (Monje et a1., 2000b; Monje et al., 20000). This behavior has also been observed with well-
watered plants growing in hydroponics at 1g (Monje and Bugbee, 1996). These results suggest that moisture
distribution within the substrate-based NDS in space approximates the moisture distribution of a hydroponic system
in 1g.

"
"8","158 O. Monje et al.
- ‘x- g V_ , Jones and Or (1998b) hypothesized that ﬂuid behavior
in porous media in microgravity is signiﬁcantly different
_, than at 1 g because capillary forces dominate in
’ Wwﬂ'f ’ microgravity. As water content increases in the substrate, a.
”f water ﬁlm forms around the surface of the substrate
particles. This effect is shown schematically in Figure 4 for
' 7 an ideal pore in a capillary tube. Basically, as the pore wets
at 1g, the pore-space ﬁlls from the bottom because gravity
_ pulls the water to the bottom of the pore, causing the
, wetting front to sag. In this case, gravitational forces are
_ ' WWW"" greater than surface tension forces and the water ﬁlm
' around the particles remains thin. Oxygen diffusion via
interconnected pore—spaces is possible until the pore-space
IWW becomes completely ﬁlled and the air—ﬁlled porosity
becomes zero. In microgravity, surface tension forces
dominate and surface ﬁlms thicken during wetting;
. f f 35 however, the pores may seal before air-ﬁlled porosity goes
i to zero, trapping air bubbles. The pores With trapped air can
quickly become 02 deﬁcient due to root metabolic
_ consumption, and can also reduce the saturated
Fig. 3' In space, water distributed in concentric conductivity (Ks) 0f the media because much of the surfaee
circles around the water supply tubes (black area for water ﬂow is reduced. Another consequence of th1s
circles) due to capillary forces. In 19’ water process is that the substrate becomes effectively saturated
drained to the bottom of the root module due to the at lower SUbSITﬂte 1110i8turc contents, thereby 011“ng Off
oxygen diffusion into the substrate at much lower water
contents compared to lg. This hypothesis for ﬂuid behavior in porous media in microgravity suggests that models
of oxygen diffusion in substrates calibrated with ground-based measurements may give erroneous predictions in
microgravity, and that plants may be waterlogged if grown with ground—based control settings (Jones and Or,
1998a). This possibility will be tested by the WONDER ﬂight experiment (Levine et al., 2002).
Moisture Control Systems Emu
Several approaches have been used . . .
to control root zone moisture in -—Ip- -- - —>-
substrate-based NDS systems. The basic ' -.
control scheme used to date has been ' '
the “on-demand” watering scheme, 31""“
whereby moisture levels in the root
zone are measured and enough water is . I
supplied to maintain a constant metric - _* . '1 —’ .
potential. Monitoring of soil moisture - .
has used either pressure sensors or heat- Start of Wetting Oman“ We: Complete Wetting
pUIse mmsture sensor arrays. Fig. 4. Differences in wetting of porous substrates in 19 compared
to 0 could be ex lained b ockets of tra ed air in 0 . The
Pressure Sensors trapged air wouﬁj signiﬁbaeitly reduce pgaturated hgdraulic

Mmsture content can be deduced conductivity, but may also modify oxygen availability in 09.
from measurements of the matric
potential in the media. Pressure sensors are currently being used to sense moisture in the root modules of
Astroculture and Biomass Production System GBPS, Orbitec) ﬂight hardware. In these systems, the tension
measured within the porous tubes used for water delivery is assumed to be in equilibrium with the water potential
of the bulk media (Morrow et al., 1993).

Pressure sensors can also be used to fabricate micro-tensiometers, whereby a ceramic cup connected to a
pressure sensor through a water-ﬁlled tube is placed in contact with the substrate. At equilibrium, the suction inside
the tensiometer equals the substrate matric potential. An array of tensiometers is included in the sensor package of
the LADA greenhouse. LADA was jointly developed by the Institute of Bio-Medical Problems (IBMP, Moscow)
and the Space Dynamics Laboratory/ Utah State University and consists of a 9cm deep root module and a

"
"9","' Space Farming 159

16x20x26 cm tall leaf chamber. The LADA is scheduled for launch to ISS on a Progress rocket in October 2002.
During a 30-34 day mission, LADA will provide mizuna (Brassica rapa cv. Nipposinica) for crew consumption and
fresh material for return to Earth, as well as produce a soil water characteristic curve in microgravity using micro-
tensiometers and heat—pulse soil moisture probes.

1n ground studies with a small particle sized substrate, it was found that high transpiration demand at high light
levels caused the matric potential of the media to be lower than the pressure measured within the porous tubes
(Steinberg and Henninger, 1997). This effect may be reduced at lower light levels because of reduced transpiration
loads, or in media with larger particle size (1-2 mm) because less negative tensions are required; however this
assumption has not yet been validated in microgravity. Preliminary observations aboard the ISS during the PESTO
experiment have shown that a substrate-based NDS system using a single pressure sensor to monitor and control
matric potential was successful in providing excellent germination (>95%) and growth of wheat in shallow (3 cm
deep) root modules. -
Moisture Sensor Arrays

Vigorous plant growth was observed in microgravity when the moisture distribution of the growth media was
monitored and controlled (SVET Greenhouse experiments on Mir; Bingham er al., 1996ab, Bingham et al., 1997).
Many of the poor aeration problems associated with substrate-based systems in early ﬂight experiments may have
been reduced through improved water management afforded by the use of an array of heat—pulse moisture sensors
(Bingham, et. a1., 1996a, 1996b, 1997; Yendler 1996). In SVET and in the recently deve10ped LADA greenhouse
system, an array of heat-pulse sensors measures moisture distribution throughout the substrate, however, the spatial
resolution depends on the number of sensors present. This is a reliable technology; however, sensor placement was
identiﬁed to be important during the spaceﬂight experiments on SVET(Sa1isbury, 1997). For example, some of the
moisture sensors read ‘wet’ when placed near a wick even though the media (3-5 mm Balkanine) was dry due to
poor hydraulic conductivity.

The heat-pulse moisture sensor consists of a temperature transducer (ADS 90) and a resistive heater embedded
in thermally conductive epoxy resin. A 20 second heat pulse is applied and the measured temperature rise depends
on the moisture content of the media in contact with the sensor. As more water is present, the media has a greater
thermal conductivity and a smaller temperature rise is observed. The moisture level is measured in kg water per kg
of air-dried substrate. This moisture level is used to calculate volumetric moisture content using the substrate bulk
density (Yendler et a1., 1995). During the Greenhouse-2 experiment, an array of moisture sensors provided root
module water content, that together with measurements of canopy transpiration, were used to develop a total water
balance in microgravity (Monje et 31., 20000).

Moisture can also be measured using time domain reﬂectometry (TDR), which is based on the prOpagation of
a high frequency electromagnetic wave along a line waveguide (Tepp et a1., 1980). The velocity of propagation of
the wave depends on the dielectric constant of the substrate and is related to the moisture content. However, this
technology has not been used in ﬂight experiments because the high frequency wave used may interfere with
spacecraft communications.

Oxygen Sensors . .

Root zone oxygen was not measured in the CHROMEX or Astroculture ﬂight experiments, so the exact
oxygen concentrations in the root zone responsible for the observed increases in ADH activity in response to
hypoxia are not known. The evidence for root zone hypoxia has prompted the evaluation of two types of oxygen
sensor technologies for use in space. The ﬁrst is the electrochemical oxygen sensor, Which consists of a thin layer
of electrolyte held between an anode and a cathode. The electrolyte is protected by a thin Teﬂon diffusion bam'er
that prevents the electrolyte from drying out and controls the rate of oxygen difﬁlsion into the cell. The operational
lifetime of the electrochemical oxygen sensors is determined by the rate of diffusion and by the volume of
electrolyte present. The LADA instrument package includes an electrochemical oxygen sensor to measure root zone
oxygen.

The second oxygen sensor technology evaluated for use in space is the root oxygen bio-availability (ROB)
sensor (Porterﬁeld et al., 2000a), however, this sensor technology is still in its initial stages of development. The
ROB sensor is an electrochemical oxygen sensor that can be designed to have the same size, shape, and oxygen
consumption as does a living root. These characteristics make the ROB sensor sensitive to changes in oxygen
bioavailability. The sensor can readily measure gravity dependent, buoyancy—driven convective oxygen transport as
well as indicate and quantify when the environment becomes limited to diffusive movement of oxygen from the
bulk media into roots (Monje et a1., 2000a). The sensor lifetime may be extended beyond the lifetime of

"
"10","160 0. Monje et 0!.

conventional electrochemical oxygen sensors because the ROB sensor consumes oxygen only when power is
supplied. This feature makes this sensor well-suited for space applications because it may reduce the need for
replacement during extended missions.

SPACECRAFT-SPECIFIC ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

Several spacecraft-speciﬁe artifacts

caused by the altered behavior of ﬂuids and A 30 g

- - - v . . . 80 v
gases in microgravny or by super—elevated L, - ~ Air (M a-
C02 and ethylene-enriched atmospheres may g 20 ’1 WI,“ . . . . . ' 60 i
confound plant experiments in space E W . y M)“ . _ 'ﬂ‘L 5
(Musgrave, 2002). These artifacts can affect E"" L“ ' RH ' f” ' ' 40 ,3
above- or below-ground plant organs and Z ' 10 A ""‘1‘” ’ %
metabolic processes resulting in plant stress 4: 20 n:
and poor growth (Porterﬁeld, 2002; Monje et A 1.0 1;
a1., 2000b). Understanding the causes of e. 22 .. . H 0 8 3

, . . . H _ ' [CO 1 ' """"
these artifacts is essential to the de51gn of .5 “W Wk” . :. 2 . 05 '5
future ﬂight experiments in order to provide a g 20 ' . "" 1“ Wk ' g
stress free growth environment in space. 3.3 {if 1J4 WV“. '1 y 0'4 §
Furthermore, identiﬁcation of these artifacts is 5"" 18 B r ' ' 1M '9 0'2 6..
needed for conducting appropriate ground‘ ° ' 0.0 8
control experiments, although some of these 1?
artifacts may not be reproducible on the a 100 ”WIT 5:3? srssc
ground. Musgrave (2002) presents an E Proms J, Dueling
excellent review of previous attempts to grow :5 90 ESE” 4‘41an J]
. . . 1min '

plants through complete life cycles 1n ﬂight- .13 Jmﬁ P
rated plant growth chambers. Studies of seed 3 C
germination and plant reproduction in space 829; Ma}, 171m 111m 4 MB 2.3 Aug 213,?
point to the importance of the gaseous
environment in microgravity, which is Fig. 5. Fluctuating air temperature and relative humidity (A),
strongly dependent on adequate ventilation oxygen and .carbon lede6 concentrations (B), and cabin
and provision of €02 to sustain plant growth. pressure In W from May to September 1997.
Although plant development, ﬂowering, pollination, and early seed growth proceed normally in space when
adequate ventilation is provided via forced convection, major changes in storage reserves were observed in
spaceﬂight. These factors can impact the vigor and the nutritional quality of seeds from space plants (Musgrave et
a1., 1997).
Spacecraft Cabin Atmosphere

The cabin atmosphere of spacecraft can be very dynamic. Aboard the Mir orbital station, large ﬂuctuations in
air temperature (10-20C), relative humidity (15-20%), 02 (2—3%) and C02 concentrations (2,000-10,000 ppm), and
cabin pressure (15-20 kPa) were measured (Figure 5). Elevated air temperatures can result in increased root zone
temperatures, and therefore, a higher 02 demand for respiration (Lemon and Wiegand, 1961), unless root zone
temperature is controlled. Elevated C02 increases plant biomass and may alter plant transpiration through direct
effects on stomatal conductance (Wheeler et a1., 1999).

Ethylene, a plant hormone, and other volatile organic compounds (VOCS) are commonly found in spacecraft
(James et a1., 1994). Ethylene in spacecraft is off-gassed from plastic materials, generated from decaying fruits in
garbage bags, or produced by plants themselves during their development (Stutte and Wheeler, 1997; Wheeler et
a1., 1996). Spacecraft are closed systems and these VOCs can accumulate to biologically active concentrations if
they are not controlled. High ethylene concentrations (0.6-1 ppm) aboard the Mir orbital space station caused the
production of sterile (seedless) wheat heads during longterm experiments conducted in the SVET greenhouse
(Salisbury, 1997 ). This event has prompted eXperiments to determine the sensitivity of staple crops (wheat and rice;
Klassen and Bugbee, 2002) and salad crops (radish; Eraso et 31., 2001) to ethylene exposures. The [SS atmospheric
control system maintains ethylene concentrations below 50 ppb, but these studies have shown that even these low
concentrations can signiﬁcantly reduce crop yields.

"
"11","Space Farming 161
Boundary Layers '
Boundary layers are undisturbed (or stagnant) layers of air surrounding plant organs. Gases, such as C02 and water
vapor, must diffuse through these
Radiation ' boundary layers when passing
H20 between the bulk air and plant
C01 02 BuoyanCY-driven organs. At 1g, the bulk air
Radiative V N f convmtion surrounding these plant organs is
heattransfer \ ____.... ¥_ _.__ turbulent and well-mixed due to the
//”' \ c' \ presence of thetmally-driven
” V V \ (buoyant) convective heat exchange.
In leaves (Figure 6 top), boundary
, , layer depths depend on wind velocity
Radlanon H20 (forced convection) and the shape of
C02 02 the leaf, and are thin enough so that
Radiative X Y f metabolic processes like respiration
heattransfer V ,.—-——- -— ----.. .. and transpiration are rarely diffusion-
,X 1' \‘\\ limited.
// \ g \ In microgravity, the absence of
\ buoyancy-driven convective mixing
can allow development of layers of
Fig. 6. On Earth (19, top), buoyancy-driven convective mixing causes stagnant air that restrict the replenish-
boundary layers around plant organs to be smaller than in microgravity ment of gases consumed by
(bottom). At 19, the houndary layers are thin enough sq that r_netabo|ic metabolic activity. Thus, the lack of
processes like respiration and transpiration are rarely dlfoSIOFI-llmlted. convective mixing in space may
. cause large boundary layers to
surround plant organs with different levels of 02, C02, water vapor, and sensible heat compared to conditions at 1g
(Figure 6 bottom). Porterﬁeld (2002) developed a model to calculate oxygen transport through boundary layers in
both gravity and microgravity. He concluded that inhibiting gravity-mediated oxygen transport may lead to severe
biophysical limitations in 02 availability, which may explain many hypoxic and physiological responses of plant
tissues observed in past spaceﬂight experiments. Poor air circulation due to increased boundary layers is believed to
have caused the reproductive failure observed during CHROMEX 4. Short exposures (2 hrs) to low oxygen
concentrations during certain development stages can cause reproductive failure. Increasing the circulation around
the plants in CHROMEX 5 WWW—
resulted in the start of normal Earth Space
seed development in space
(Musgrave et 01-, 1997) Bmyancy—driven 02
The effect 0f boundary convection 02 00;
layers on heat exchange and
transport Processes was tested (:02 § 1
in parabolic ﬂights aboard the ﬂ ,»*""‘"" ""-
KC—135 aircraft. These tests .- '-- --—..._ // ﬂ \\\
were part of the risk IIIIIIIIII fIf‘tit,.,:'*|j’i:|;: l::__§-‘-I'=I..I_ji|_;'I}*I*I""'I l‘ “I H ‘1;I;::_gfﬂ
mitigation Studies for .the flgl:‘tll:l:l:l:,|:li :I; Il 1' III] ”:11“: t: I: 1: i: I: I :Illl I Hz:
transport around the aerial . .. ﬂ ., . _. ._ _ _ .
leaf tissue and oxygen Figure 7: The lack of buoyancy driven convection in rhicrogravity essentially caps
transport within the rooting off the root zone from 02 re-supply as boundary layers Increase compared to 19.
matrix decreased in phase
with changes in gravity. Leaf temperatures measured with infrared transducers increased during periods of micro-
gravity without forced convection, but remained near air temperature when forced convection was present. This
result suggests that convective heat exchange is a signiﬁcant factor for cooling leaves in 1g, and that forced
convection must be used to ameliorate the lack of convective mixing in microgravity. In the same KC-135
experiments, the ROB oxygen sensor in moist substrate (Porterﬁeld et al., 2000a) measured decreased oxygen
bioavailability in microgravity. These results suggest that larger boundary layers also form in the shoot-to-root zone

"
"12","162 O. Monje et al.

interface when convective mixing is no longer present in microgravity, which essentially caps off the root zone
from turbulent resupply from the air above (Figure 7). Thus, re-supply of 02 consumed by plant roots in
microgravity would occur through diffusion processes alone. Plant roots would become hypoxic whenever the rate
of root respiration exceeded the rate of mass transfer of oxygen to root meristems, where respiration takes place.
LIGHTING SYSTEMS FOR SPACE FARMS

Perhaps the most energy intensive subsystem of a space farm is the lighting system (Salisbury and Bugbee,
1988). Plants on Earth have evolved to convert light into the chemical energy via the process of photosynthesis.
The amount of light available to a crop determines its daily crop growth rate, which summed over the life cycle of
the crop determines the total amount of plant biomass produced_(Bugbee and Monje, 1992). In addition to being the
energy source for photosynthesis, light spectral composition regulates many photomorphogenic and phototropic
aspects of plant development and morphology (Smith, 1982; Kendrick and Kronenberg, 1994). Although only 1%
of the incident solar radiation on the Earth is converted into biomass, modern agriculture has been able to feed
billions of humans for tens of thousands of years because the source of energy is freely available. In contrast, space
farms may have to generate all the light required for crop production from electricity. Thus, food production is
severely constrained aboard power-limited spacecraft with only solar cells or fuel cells for producing electricity.
These limitations may be reduced in farms located on planetary surfaces, where electricity generated by nuclear
power may be used to drive lamp-based lighting systems and lamp systems might be supplemented by sunlight.

Current electric lamps are 15 to 35% efﬁcient in conversion of electrical energy to light, but promising
technologies with sources such as light emitting diodes (LEDs), microwave lamps, solar collectors, light pipes,
ﬁber Optics, and holographic distribution systems offer the potential to improve these numbers. Testing of new
technologies will include quantifying photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) from lamps, ﬁnding lamps with
longer operating lives, quantifying radiant conversion efﬁciencies, and evaluating photosynthetic efﬁciencies and
plant growth under the different lamps to deﬁne the system efﬁciency. In plant growth chambers, popular choices
for electric lighting technologies include various high—intensity discharge (HID) and ﬂuorescent lamps.

High-pressure sodium (HPS) HID lamps demonstrate a relatively high efﬁciency for converting electrical
power into PAR when compared to other conventional lighting sources (Sager et a1., 1982). However, the spectral
quality of the HPS lamp is relatively low in the blue wavelengths, which can cause undesirable photomorophogenic
development of certain plants (Wheeler et a1., 1991; Yorio et a1., 1995). Fluorescent lamps meet most spectral
requirements for plants in terms of photosynthesis and photomorphogenesis when compared to plants grown under
natural light (Smith, 1982). However, the conversion efﬁciency of electricity into light for ﬂuorescent lamps is
usually lower than that of conventional HID lamps (Sager et a1., 1982). The relatively short lifetime of ﬂuorescent
lamps could potentially become a major drawback for utilization in missions involving extended plant culture.
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have several appealing features for space applications, including low levels of
thermal radiation that can heat the plant growing area, no gas-ﬁlled lamps, no hot electrodes, no high~voltage
ballasts, and a very long operating life in comparison to HID or ﬂuorescent lamps (Bula et a1., 1991). Moreover,
implementation of LED arrays instead of conventional lamps may increase crew safety and working space. Red and
blue LEDs have great potential for use as a light source to drive photosynthesis due to their output near the peak
absorption regions of chlorophyll. Previous research has shown that red LEDs supplemented with blue light can
adequately support various crop plants (Brown et a1., 1995; Goins et a1., 1997; Hoenecke et a1., 1992).

Plants are adapted to utilize a wide—spectrum of light to control photomorphogenic responses. Both red light, '
via phytochrome, and blue light, via blue/UV photoreceptor(s), are effective in inducing photomorphogenic
responses (Cosgrove, 1981; Mohr, 1987). Previous studies showed that red-biased, blue deﬁcient light sources
increase plant internode length, stem length and leaf elongation (Barnes and Bugbee, 1992; Britz and Sager, 1990;
Wheeler et a1., 1991). Hence, for supporting optimal plant growth, the ideal combination of blue and red light is
still a question.

In contrast to LEDs, the sulfur-microwave electrode—less lamp, (also known simply as the ""microwave lamp"")
produces a bright broad—spectrum visible light (Ciolkosz et 31., 1998). The bulb in a microwave lamp is a spherical
quartz envelope ﬁlled with a few milligrams of sulfur and argon. The argon is weakly ionized using microwaves.
The argon heats the sulfur into a gaseous state, forming diatomic sulfur molecules, which emit a broad continuum
of energy as they drop back to lower energy states. According to reports by the manufacturer (Fusion Lighting,
Rockville, MD), the microwave lamp technology produces a uniform visible spectrum similar to sunlight, but with
very little undesirable infrared or ultraviolet radiation, and has a very high electrical conversion efﬁciency. The
efﬁcient high light output from the lOOO-W microwave lamp makes it an ideal light source for light pipes and large
plant growth chamber systems.

"
"13","Space Farming 163

Currently plant experiments on spacecraft have employed ﬂuorescent and LED based lighting systems to
supply between 100-300 umol m'z s'I of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) to small plant growth chambers
(0.025005 m'z). New technologies are expected to boost these values to 1000 umol ni’2 s'1 of PAR in chambers as
large as 0.5-1.0 m2. However, the near-term designs for ISS will be limited to 300 umol m""2 s'1 because of power
limitations. Lighting systems for space farms capable of supplying growing areas of 20—40 in2 per crew member'1
are being developed using more energy demanding lamp systems (High Pressure Sodium, HPS; Metal Halide, MH;
and microwave lamps). .

Lighting System Integration Issues

The growth volume will most likely be limited in space—based controlled environments (Salisbury and Bugbee,
1988); therefore, overall plant growth area and chamber height are of critical importance for future considerations
of lighting technologies. SeVeral spatial arrangements (spherical, cylindrical, toroidal) versus the traditional planar
arrangement between the lamp banks and the plants are possible, and these arrangements differ in how well the
growth volume is utilized (Berkovich, 2000). A cylindrical arrangement was found to be optimal for use in small
greenhouses. In optimized, continuous cropping systems, the spacing scheme between plants should change as the
plants increase in size between transplanting and harvesting, which maximizes canOpy light interception at all
growth stages, no matter the lamp source. An engineering solution addressing this issue is the concept of the
conveyor-type greenhouse, which was ﬁrst deveIOped by Russian physiologist Valeri Glevovich in the early 1960’s
(Yu. Berkhovich, personal communication). This concept has been developed into the Vitacycle prototype
greenhouse concept (Berkovich et al., 1997).

HPS lamps act as point-sources of radiation as opposed to CWF and LED light sources, which are intrinsically
more diffuse over the plant canopy as a result of lamp design and associated luminarie. The plant canopy under the
HPS lamp sources can experience ""hot-spots"" and non-unifotm intensity, especially directly beneath the lamp.
Improved light distribution may be achieved by locating the lamp greater distances away from the canopy.
However, small-scale plant growth chambers, such as the present designs of prototype space farms, often allocate
limited area for mounting lamps. Likewise, current space-based plant growth chambers are usually designed with
the light source mounted as close as possible to the plant canopy. Hence, there is a need for further development of
focusing materials and diffusers, which will efﬁciently and evenly distribute point—source light over plant canopies.
Current investigations in this area include research with focusing mirrors, prismatic reﬂecting ﬁlms, holographic
diffusers, and intra-canopy lighting using light pipes (Tibbits et al., 1994; Stasiak et 31., 1998; Frantz et 31., 2000) in
combination with innovative lamp technologies and solar collectors (Mori et a1, 1987; Olson et al., 1988; Cuello et
al., 1998).

CONCLUSIONS

Space farming has a bright future now that the International Space Station nears completion. The ISS can serve
as a platform where many subsystems, theoretical hypotheses, and designs for future plant-based life support
systems can be tested. The knowledge gained in these experiments can be used to fuel the technological advances
needed to improve current controlled environment systems until they become economically feasible when
compared to conventional agriculture. This in turn will be used to provide continued life support to mankind on
Earth and in future space colonies.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to recognize Dr. Wheeler for his insightful comments and suggestions. This work was
supported by a grant to GW Stutte from The National Aeronautical and Space Administration’s Fundamental
Biological Programs Office (NCC10-0027).

REFERENCES
Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board (ASEB), Advanced Technology for Human Support in Space, National

Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1997.

Allen E.R., D.W. Ming, L.R. Hossner, and D.L. Henninger, Modeling transport kinetics in clinoptilolite phosphate

rock systems, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 59, 248-255, 1995.

Andre M. and D. Massimino, Grth of plants at reduced pressures: Experiments in wheat——technological

advantages and constraints, Adv. Space Res., 12, 97-106, 1992.

Barnes C. and B. Bugbee, Morphological responses of wheat to blue 1ight,J. Plant Physiol., 139, 339-342, 1992.
Berkovich Y.A., Evaluation of planting surfaces for crop production in microgravity, Adv. Space Res., 26, 271~279,
2000.

"
"14","164 O. Monje et a1.

Berkovich Y.A., N.M. Krivobok, Y.E. Syniak, E.R. Zaitsev, B.N. Monakhov, N.N. Protasov, L.K. Abramov, N.M.
Samsonov, and NS. Farafonov, Perspectives in deveIOping a space greenhouse for the International Space
Station, Proceedings of the Sixth European Smposium of Space Environmental Control Systems, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands, ESA SP-400. pp 839-844, 1997.

Bide] L.P.R., P. Renault, L. Pages, and L.M. Riviere, Mapping meristem respiration of Prunus persica (L.) Batsch
seedlings: potential respiration of the meristems, 02 diffusional constraints and combined effects on root
growth, J. Exp. Bot., 51, 755-768, 2000.

Bingham, G.E., S.B. Brown, F .B. Salisbury, W.F. Campbell, J .G. Carman, G. Jahns, D. Pletcher, D.B. Bubenheim,
B. Yendler, V. Sychev, M.A. Levinskikh, and I. Podolski, Plant growth and plant environmental monitoring
equipment on the Mir space station: experience and data from the greenhouse II experiment, SAE Technical
Paper Series No.961364, 1996a.

Bingham, G.E., S.B. Jones, I. Podolski, and B. Yendler, Porous substrate water relations observed during the
greenhouse in ﬂight experiment (MIR Space Station - 1995), SAE T echnical Paper Series No. 961547, 1996b.

Bingham, G.E., S.B. Jones, D. Or, I. Podolski, M.A. Levinskikh, V. Sychev, T. Ivanova, P. Kostov, S. Sapunova, I.
Dandolov, D.B. Bubenheim, and G. Jahns, Microgravity effects on water supply and substrate properties in
porous matrix root support systems, Reprint IAF/IAA-97—G.3.03, 46”"" International Astronautical Congress,
Turin, Italy, October 6-10, 1997.

Bonsi, C.K., P.A. Loretan, W.A. Hill, and D.G. Mortley, Response of sweetpotatoes to continuous light.
HotScience, 27, 471, 1992.

Britz, SJ. and J.C. Sager, Photomorphogenesis and photo-assimilation in soybean and sorghum grown under broad-
spectrum and blue-deﬁcient light sources. Plant Physiol., 94, 448—454, 1990.

Brown, C.S., T.W. Tibbitts, J .G. Croxdale, and RM. Wheeler, Potato tuber formation in the spaceﬂight

, environment, Life Support and Biosphere Sal, 4,71-76, 1997.

Brown, C.S., A.C. Schuerger, and J .C. Sager, Growth and photomorphogenesis of pepper plants under red light-
emitting diodes With supplemental blue or far-red lighting, J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci, 120, 808-813, 1995.

Bula, R.J., R.C. Morrow, T.W. Tibbitts, D.J. Barta, R.W. Ignatius, and T.S. Martin, Light-emitting diodes as a
radiation source for plants, HortScience, 26, 203-205, 1991.

Bugbee, B., and O. Monje, The optimization of crOp productivity: Theory and validation, BioScz’ence, 42, 49 4-501,
1992.

Ciolkosz, D.E., L.D. Albright, and J .C. Sager, Microwave lamp characterization. Life Support and Biosphere Sci,
5, 167-174, 1998.

Conway, G., The doubly glean revolution, Comstock Publishing Associates, Ithaca, NY, 1999.

Cosgrove, D.J., Rapid suppression of growth by blue light. Occun‘ence, time course, and general characteristics,

Plant Physiol., 67, 584-590, 1981.

Crisp, P., The Farmer Through History, Tomas Leaming, Nelson, Australia, 1993.

Cuello, J .L., P. Sadler, D. J ack, E. Ono, and K.A. Jordan, Evaluation of light transmission and distn'bution materials
for lunar and Martian bioregenerative life support, Life Support and Biosphere Sci, 5, 389-402, 1998.

Dalrymple, D.G., Controlled environment agg'culture: A global review of gzeenhouse food production. Ofﬁce of
International C00peration and development, US Department of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Economic

Report No. 89. 1973.

Daunicht, H~J. and H—J. Brinkj ans, Gas exchange and growth of plants under reduced air pressure. Adv.Space Res.,
12(5), 107-114, 1992.

De Willigen, P. and M. Van Noordwijk, Mathematical models on diffusion of oxygen to and Within plant roots,
With special emphasis on effects of soi1~root contact, Plant and Soil, 77, 215-231, 1984.

Dreschel, T.W. and J .C. Sager, Control of water and nutrients using a porous tube: A method for growing plants in
space, J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci., 24, 944-947, 1989.

Drysdale, A.E., Life support trade studies involving plants, SAE T echm'cal Paper 2001-01-2362, 2001.

Eraso, I., G.W. Stutte, B.V. Peterson, and EC. Stryjewski, Effects of ethylene on the growth and development of
radish,. Proc. Plant Growth Reg, 28, 118-123, 2001.

Erickson, C.L., Raised ﬁeld agriculture in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Expedition, 30, 8—16, 1988.

Frantz, J .M., R.J. Joly, and CA. Mitchell, Intracanopy lighting inﬂuences radiation capture, productivity, and leaf
senescence in cowpea canopies, J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., 125, 694-701, 2000.

Gill, V. and T. Dale, Topsoil and civilization, University of Oklahoma Press, 1974.

Goins, G.D., Ruffe L.M., Yorio NC, and RM. Wheeler, Salad crop production under different wavelengths of red
light-emitting diodes, SAE T echm'cal Paper, 2001-01-2422, 2001.

"
"15","Space Farming 165

Goins, G.D., N.C. Yorio, M.M. Sanwo, and 03. Brown, Photomorphogenesis, photosynthesis, and seed yield of
wheat plants grown under red light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with and without supplemental blue lighting, J.
Exp. Bot., 48, 1407-1413, 1997a.

Goins, G.D., H.G. Levine, C.L. Macowiak, R.M. Wheeler, J .D. Carr and D. Ming, Comparison studies of candidate
nutrient delivery systems for plant cultivation in space, SAE T eclmical Paper Series No. 972304, 1997b.

Goins, G.D., N.C. Yorio, and H. Vivenza, Performance of salad-type plants using lighting and nutrient delivery
concepts intended for spaceﬂight, SAE Transactions. Journal of Aerospace, 107, 284-289, 1998.

Graf, J., B. Finger, and K. Daues, Life support systems for the space environment: Basic tenets for desiggers,
Environmental Systems Commercial Space Technology Center, JSC, 2001.

Grigg, D.B., Agg'cultural systems of the world, Cambridge University Press, 1974.

Harlan, J .R, Crops and man, American Society of Agronomy, Crop Sci. Society of America, Madison, WI. 1971.

Huxley, A., Green inheritance. Collins-Harvill, London. 1984.

Hoenecke, M.E., R.J. Bula, and T.W. Tibbitts, Importance of blue photon levels for lettuce seedlings grown under
red lightwemitting diodes, HortScience, 27, 427-430, 1992.

James, J .L., T.F. Limero, H.J. Leano, J .F. Boyd, and RA. Covington, Volatile organic contaminants found in the
habitable environment of the Space Shuttle: STS-26 to STS-55, Aviat. Space Environ. Meal, 65, 851-857,
1994.

Janick, J ., R.W. Schery, F .W. Woods, and V.W. Rutan, Plant science: An introduction to world crops. 3rd Ed. W.H.
Freeman and Co., San Francisco, 1981.

Jones, SB. and D. Or, Design of porous media for Optimal liquid and gaseous ﬂuxes to plant roots. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. J., 62, 563-573, 1998a.

Jones, SB. and D. Or, Microgravity effects on water ﬂow and distribution in unsaturated porous media: analyses of
ﬂight experiments. Water Resour. Res., 35, 929-942, 1998b:

Kendrick, RE, and G.H.M Kronenberg, Mode of co-action between blue/UV light and light absorbed by
phytochrome in higher plants. in: Blue light responses: Photomogphogenesis in plant, 2nd ed, The
Netherlands, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.

Klassen, S., and B. Bugbee, Sensitivity of wheat and rice to low levels of atmospheric ethylene, Crop Sci., 42, 746-
753, 2002.

Kramer, R]. and J .S. Boyer, Water relations of plants and soils, Academic Press, San Diego, Ca. 1995.

Lemon, E.R., Soil aeration and plant root relations: 1. Theory, Agron. J., 54, 157-170, 1961.

Lemon, ER. and CL. Wiegand, Soil aeration and plant root relations: II. Root respiration, Agron. J., 54, 171-175,
1961.

Leonard, J .N., The ﬁrst farmers, Time Life Books. 1973.

Letey, J ., H. Stolzy, N. Valoras, and T.E. Szuszkiewicz, Inﬂuence of soil oxygen on growth and mineral
concentration of barley, Agronomy J., 54, 538-540, 1962.

Levine, H.G., G.K. Tynes, J .H. Norikane, Evaluation of alternative water input modes for space-based plant culture
applications, SAE T echm’cal Paper 2002-01-2381, 2002.

Levinskikh, M.A., V.N. Sychev, T.A. Derendyaeva, O.B. Signalova, I.G. Podolsky, S.V. Avdeev, and GE.
Bingham, Preliminary data on growth and development of plants in a sequence of generations under the
conditions of Space ﬂight, Aviakosm. Ecol. Med, In Press., 2001.

MacElroy, R.D., M. Kliss, and C. Straight, Life support systems for Mars transit, Adv. Space Res., 12, 159-166,
1992.

Mohr, H., Blue light responses: Phenomena and occurrence in plants and microorganisms, H. Senger, ed. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 133-144, 1987.

Monje, 0., J. Garland, and G.W. Stutte, Factors controlling oxygen delivery in ALS hydroponic systems, SAE
T echnical Paper, 2001-01—2425, 2000.

Monje, 0., D.M. Porterﬁeld, and G.W. Stutte, Boundary layers around plant leaf and root tissues depend on
gravity, Grav. Space Biol. Bull., 14, 25, 2000a

Monje, 0., GE. Bingham, B.K. Eames, J. Conlin, V. Sychev, M.A. Levinskikh, and I. Podolsky, Quantifying
differences between spaceﬂight and ground plant experiments: transpiration measurements. Life Support and
Biosphere Science Conference, Baltimore, MD, 2000b.

Monje, 0., GE. Bingham, F.B. Salisbury, W.F. Campbell, J.G. Carman, B.K. Eames, V Sychev, M.A. Levinskikh,
and I. Podolsky, 20000. Canopy photosynthesis and transpiration in microgravity: Gas exchange
measurements aboard Mir, Adv. Space Res., 26, 303-306, 2000b.

"
"16","166 O. Monje er al.

Monje, O. and B. Bugbee, Adaptation to high CO; concentration in an optimal environment: Radiation capture,
canopy quantum yield and carbon use efﬁciency. Plan, Cell Environ, 21, 315-324, 1998.

Monje, O. Predicting canopy transpiration rates of hydrogonically-ggown plant canogies in controlled
environments, Ph.D. Dissertation, Utah State University, Logan, UT, 1998.

Monje, .0. and B. Bugbee, Characterizing photosynthesis and transpiration of plant communities in controlled
environments, Acta Hort. 440, 123-128, 1996.

Mori, K., H. Ohya, K. Matsumoto, and H. Furune, Sunlight supply and gas exchange systems in microalgal
bioreactor, in: Controlled ecological life support systems, regenerative life support system in space, eds. R.D.
MacElroy and D.T. Smemoff, NASA Conf. Publ. 2480, Ames Research Center, CA. 1987.

Morrow, R.C., N.A. Dufﬁe, T.W. Tibbits, R.J. Bula, D.J. Barta, D.W. Ming, R.M. Wheeler, and D.M. Porterﬁeld,
Plant responses in astroculture ﬂight experiment unit. SAE T echnica! Paper, 951624, 1995.

Morrow, R.C., W.R. Dinauer, R.J. Bula, and T.W. Tibbitts, The ASTROCULTURE-l ﬂight experiment: pressure
control of the WCSAR porous tube nutrient delivery system. SAE T echnical Paper, 932282, 1993.

Muhlestein, D.J., T. Hooten, J .M. Norton and B. Bugbee, The long-term effects of high ammonium/nitrate ratios on
wheat growth and nitriﬁcation in hydroponic culture, Life Support and Biosphere Science Conference,
Baltimore, MD, 2000.

Musgrave, M.E., Seeds in Space, Seed Science Research, 12, 1-16, 2002.

Musgrave, M.E., A. Kuang, and S.W. Matthews, Plant reproduction during spaceﬂight: importance of the gaseous
environment, Planta, 203, S177-8184, 1997.

Myers, J , Space biology: Ecological aspects: Introductory remarks, Am. Biol. Teach., 25, 409-411, 1963.

Olson, R.L., M.W. Oleson, and T.J. Slavin, CELSS for advanced manned mission. HortScience, 23, 275-286, 1988.

Peterson, L.A., N.T. Welander, and O. Hellgren, An intermittent aeroponics system adaptable to root research. in
Plant Roots and their environment: Proceedings of an ISRR-smposium, eds B.L. McMichael and H. Persson,
Elsevier Science Publishers, New York, NY, 628-631, 1991.

Podolsky, I. and A. Mashinsky, Peculiarities of moisture transfer in capillary-porous soil substitutes during space
ﬂight, Adv. Space Res., 14, 39-46, 1994.

Porterﬁeld, D.M., The biophysical limitations in physiological transport and exchange in plants grown in
microgravity. J. Plant Growth Regal, 21, 177-190, 2002.

Porterﬁeld, D.M., O. Monje, G.W. Stutte and M.E. Musgrave, Rootzone hypoxia responses result from inhibition
of gravity dependant oxygen transport in microgravity, ,Grav. Space Biol. Bull. 14: 50, 20002..

Porterﬁeld, D.M., DJ. Barta, D.W. Ming, R.C. Morrow, and M.E. Musgrave, Astroculture root metabolism and
cytochemical analysis, Adv. space Res., 26, 315-318, 2000b.

Porterﬂeld, D.M., M.L. Crispi, and M.E. Musgrave, Changes in soluble sugar, starch, and alcohol dehydrogenase in
Arabidopsis thaliana exposed to diluted N2 atmOSpheres. Plant Cell Physiol., 38, 1397-1401, 1997a.

Porterﬁeld, D.M., S.W. Matthews, C.J. Daugherty, and M.E. Musgrave, Spaceﬂight exposure effects on
transcription, activity, and alcohol dehydrogenase in the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiol., 113,
685-693, 1997b.

Prakash, C.S., The genetically modiﬁed crop debate in the context of agricultural evolution, Plant Physiol,, 126, 8-
15, 2001.

Sager, J .C., J .L. Edwards, and W.H. Klein, Light energy utilization efﬁciency for photosynthesis, Trans. Amer. Soc.
Agr. Eng., 25, 1737-1746, 1982.

Salisbury, F.B., Growing super—dwarf wheat in space station Mir. Life Support Biosphere Sci, 4, 155-166, 1997.

Salisbury, F. B., and B. Bugbee, Plant productivity in controlled environments, HortScience, 23, 293-299, 1988.

Smith, H., Light quality, photoperception, and p1antstrategy,Ann. Rev. Plant. Physiol., 33, 1882-1887, 1982.

Stamp, L.D., A Histogy of Land Use in Arid Regions, United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization, 1961.

Stasiak, M.A., R. Cote, M. Dixon, and B. Grodzinski, Increasing plant productivity in closed environments with
inner canopy illumination, Life Support Biosphere Sci, 5, 175-182, 1998.

Steinberg, S.L. and D.L. Heminger, Response of the water status of soybean to changes in soil water potentials
controlled by the water pressure in microporous tubes, Plant Cell Environ, 20, 1506-1516, 1997.

Stutte, G.W., O. Monje, G. Goins and L. Ruffe, Evapotranspiration and photosynthesis characteristics of two wheat
cultivars grown the biomass production system. SAE Technical Paper 2001-0202180, 2000. '

Sutte, G.W., C.L. Mackowiak, N.C. Yorio, and R.M. Wheeler, Theoretical and practical considerations of staggered
crop production in a BLSS, Life SupportBiosphere Sci, 6, 287-291, 1999.

"
"17","Space Farming 167

Stutte, G.W. and RM. Wheeler, Accumulation and effect of volatile organic compounds in closed life support
systems, Adv. Space Research, 20, 1913-1922, 1997.

Sychev, V.N., M.A. Levinskikh, I.G. Podolsky, and GE. Bingham, Final plant experiments on Mir provide second
generation wheat and seeds, ASGSB Annual Meeting, Seattle, WA, 1999.

Swartzkopf, S.H., Design of controlled ecological life support systems, BioScz’ence, 42, 526—535, 1992.

Tripathy, B.C., C.S. Brown, H.G. Levine, and AD. Krikorian, Growth and photosynthetic responses of wheat
plants grown in space. Plant Physiol., 110, 801-806, 1996.

Tibbitts, T.W., W. Cao, and RM. Wheeler, Growth of potatoes for CELSS, NASA Cont. Report 177646, Ames
Research Center, Moffett Field, CA. 1994.

Topp, G.C., J.L. Davis, and A.P. Arman, Electromagnetic determination of soil water content: measurements in
coaxial transmission lines. Water Resour. Res., 16, 574—582, 1980.

Wheeler, R.M., G.W. Stutte, G.V. Subbarao, and NC. Yorio. Plant growth and human life support for space travel,
in Handbook of Plant and Crop Physiology, 2nd Edition, ed M. Pessarakli, 925-941, 2001.

Wheeler, R.M., and C. Martin-Brennan, Mars greenhouses: Concept and challenges, NASA Tech. Mem. 208577.
2000.

Wheeler, R.M., C.L. Mackowiak, N.C. Yorio, and J.C. Sager, Effects of C02 on stomatal conductance: Do stomata
open at very high C02 concentrations. Annal. Bot, 83, 243251, 1999.

Wheeler, R.M., B.V. Peterson, J .C. Sager, and W.M. Knott, Ethylene production by plants in closed environments.
Adv. Space Res., 18, 193-196, 1996.

Wheeler, R.M., C.L. Mackowiak, G.W. Stutte, J.C. Sager, N.C. Yorio, L.M. Ruffe, R.E. Fortson, T.W. Dreschel,
W.M. Knott, and K.A. Corey, NASA's biomass production chamber: A testbed for bioregenerative life support
studies. Adv. Space Res., 18, 215-224, 1996. .

Wheeler, R.M., C.L. Mackowiak, J.C. Sager, N.C. Yorio, W.M. Knott and W.L. Berry, Growth and gas exchange
by lettuce stands in a closed, controlled environment. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sal, 119, 610-615, 1994.

Wheeler, R.M., C.L. Mackowiak, L.M. Siegrest, and J .C. Sager, Supraoptimal carbon dioxide effects on growth of
soybean (Glycine max L.), J. Plant Physiol., 142, 173—178, 1993.

Wheeler, R.M., C.L. Mackowiak, and J .C. Sager, Soybean stem growth under high—pressure sodium with
supplemental lighting, Agron. J., 83, 903-906, 1991.

Wright, B.D., W.C. Bausch, and W.M. Knott, A hydroponic system for microgravity plant experiments. T rans. Am.
Soc. Ag. Eng, 31, 440-446, 1988. '

Yendler, B., Thermal properties of unsaturated substrates used for space research. SAE T ech. Paper 961548, 1996.

Yendler, B., G.E. Bingham, S.B. Jones, and I. Podolsky, Moisture sensor for use in microgravity. SAE T ech. Paper
951471,1995. '

Yorio, N. C., C. L. Mackowiak, R. M. Wheeler, and J . C. Sager, Vegetative growth of potato under high-pressure
sodium, high-pressure sodium SON-Agro, and metal halide lamps, HortScience, 30, 374-376, 1995.

"
