"","x"
"1","Title of Publication Edited by
T MS ( T he Minerals, Metals & Materials Society), Year
DIRECT OBSERVATION OF PORE FORMATION AND BUBBLE MOBILITY
DURING CONTROLLED MELTING AND RE-SOLIDIFICATION IN
MICROGRAVITY
R. N. Grugell, A.V. Anilkumarz, and CF. Lee3
1Marshall Space Flight Center, SD46, Huntsville, AL, 35812, USA
2Vanderbilt University, BOX 1592, Station B, Nashville, TN, 37235, USA
3Engineering Sciences Incorporation, Huntsville, AL, 35802
Keywords: Solidiﬁeation, Porosity, GASAR, Mierogravity, and Suecinonitrile
Abstract
Detailed studies on the controlled melting and subsequent re-solidifieation 0f suecinonitrile
were conducted in the microgravity environment aboard the International Space Station (188)
using the PFMI apparatus (Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation) located in the ISS’
glovebOX facility (GBX). Samples were initially prepared on ground by ﬁlling glass tubes, 1
cm ID and approximately 30 em in length, with pure suecinonitrile (SCN) under 450 millibar of
nitrogen. During Space processing, experimental parameters like temperature gradient and
translation speed, for melting and solidiﬁcation, were remotely monitored and controlled from
the ground Telescience Center (TSC) at the Marshall Space Flight Center. Real time
Visualization during controlled melting revealed bubbles of different sizes initiating at the
solid/liquid interface, and traveling up the temperature gradient ahead of them. Subsequent
controlled re-solidiﬁcation 0f the SCN revealed the details of porosity formation and evolution.
A preliminary analysis of the melt back and re-solidiﬁeation and its implications to future
microgravity materials processing is presented and discussed.
Introduction

The generation and inclusion of detrimental porosity, e.g., “pipes” and “rattails” can occur
during controlled directional solidiﬁcation processing. The origin of these defects is generally
attributed to gas evolution and entrapment during solidiﬁcation of the melt. On Earth, given the
density difference between gas and liquid metal, an initiated bubble can rise through the liquid
and exit to the atmosphere, whereas, in microgravity, the bubble is likely to get trapped in the
solidiﬁed sample. Consequently, porosity inclusion diminishes the appeal of microgravity
processing and therefore it is important that the nature of this problem be systematically
examined, with a View to eliminating it.
The Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation (PFMI) is a systematic effort directed towards
gaining an understanding of porosity formation and mobility during controlled directional
solidiﬁcation (DS) in the microgravity environment aboard the International Space Station
(188). PFMI uses a pure transparent material sueeinonitrile (SCN), in conjunction with a
translating temperature gradient stage, so that direct observation and recording of pore
generation and bubble mobility can be made. PFMI examines the role of thermoeapillary forces
in affecting bubble dynamics, as they pertain to melting and solidiﬁcation processes in a
microgravity environment.

"
"2","On ground, the samples are deliberately prepared to contain porosity. In Space, they are ﬁrst
directionally melted in a controlled way. This process releases the included gas as bubbles,
emanating at the interface. Due to the nature of the initial conditions, these bubbles are
polydisperse in size and travel up the temperature gradient at different speeds. The bubbles
eventually dissolve in the molten liquid, setting up the stage for a controlled re-solidiﬁcation
experiment, with the central question being: how does porosity evolve at the interface?
Experimental Procedure
Experimentally, 10mm inside diameter quartz tubes 0n the order of 30 cm in length were
initially ﬁlled with pure succinonitrile under a nitrogen atmosphere (450 millibar) and allowed
to solidify. During the solidiﬁcation process, shrinkage occurred which resulted in the
“herring-bone” structure seen in Figure 1.
Jaaazr' ,_.-..-_i__ ""
Figure 1. Photograph of the PFMI-2 sample. The sample tube is a borosilicate
glass tube, 10 mm ID. and 12 mm OD. The tube is 30 cm in length and coated
with indium tin oxide (ITO) to enable resistive heating and melting of the sample.
Seen in the sample is “centerline cracking” and a “herring-bone” structure that
formed during inward solidiﬁcation of the SCN.
. - -....*1'*'-:~,'- -;~ u
-= ' I H .. ""I ' ""'r :1 ' 1
...3. - ah... . _ .-_.._ 3‘. """"$""""' .
HF Jl- i} ._ 74-. -.-.-ﬂu J
_ 1.? ..._ F I . Ha."" _-I""I I
i...“ ., L l. J -. ..~, -
. . FLA"" .5 -' """"-' I I - I . ""1,. I 1"" .
‘ ""J' .._ - #1:"" - 'w .'
5.... -__ - 1|."" .. . . :5. '1'.- '. 'tl: '1
Figure 2 Figure 3
Figure 2. Photograph of the PFMI heating chamber (right) and control unit (left).
One of the Video cameras can be seen.
Figure 3. The Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation apparatus (lower left
corner) as installed in the Mierogravity Science Glovebox aboard the International
Space Station.
Each sample was ﬁtted with an effective “spring and piston” assemblage, to accommodate the
expansion and contraction during melting and solidiﬁcation, and siX in situ thermocouples to
accurately characterize the thermal environment. During Space processing, the sample tubes
were inserted into the PFMI directional solidiﬁcation chamber (Figures 2 and 3), which
establishes a temperature gradient in the liquid and permits observation of the molten region.

"
"3","Bubbles, which form at the solid/liquid interface, during melting and solidiﬁcation, are tracked
with two Video cameras set at 90 degrees from each other and orthogonal to the sample tube.
Sample temperatures, camera positions and magniﬁcations, and translation speeds during
melting and re-solidiﬁcation, were controlled from the ground at the Marshall Space Flight
Center (MSFC) Telescience Center (TSC). During an experimental run, the Video is recorded
on board, and also downlinked in real time, as and when possible. Preliminary analysis has
been made from the Video recorded on board.
Experimental Observations
The solidiﬁed sample is ﬁrst melted in a unidirectional way, at about 10 microns per second.
Bubbles of different sizes form at the melt interface and translate at different speeds in the
temperature ﬁeld ahead of them, before coming to rest. Figures 4a and 4b capture the motion of
two small bubbles, close to the centerline, as they migrate up the temperature gradient, after
dislodging from the melt interface, which is melting back at 10 microns/seeond. A planar
solid/liquid interface is observed, liquid on the left and the solid 0n the right; the latter showing
the “ﬁshbone” structure due to shrinkage during preparation on ground. Figure 4a shows a
dislodged bubble moving up the temperature gradient in the liquid (19.1K/em) and another,
slightly smaller bubble, just dislodging at the interface. A little time later (0.67 sec), in Figure
4b, the larger bubble is almost into the gradient heating ring. In comparison to Figure 4a the
separation between the bubbles has increased, the larger bubble moving faster.
PFI'II—IE 29787-3 11' -' . F’FI'II—‘IE 28895-5 . I. Q‘
as—1g—aa _19=ae=;3? +,._ 39—1ng2 _19=Iae=;39 , _
342—33: 2.32:2; w» w. egg—ggﬁ-eag +~--.~-~ =-.
- '3‘ i“? t' i ‘ - 321$
5 ‘ 1;? ""F_£.-’ -_ E! I .i - ”:15'9"" TJ- :
:i : ?.Jh'gr ' :23: 'Uﬁv’g’. ""
L i. f : L i a
__ . __;.._.._ . iilli§£;_j .._ - __:.:.—-_.__ i. . "" 4135sz {1
Figure 4a 7 Figure 4b
Figure 4. Motion of two small bubbles, close to the centerline, as they migrate up
the temperature gradient, after dislodging from the melt interface.
Over a period of time, these bubbles dissolve into the melt and disappear. This sets up the stage
for a controlled re-solidiﬁcation experiment. The gas-laden molten sample is directionally
solidiﬁed in a controlled manner, starting at a rate of 1mier0n /seeor1d. The observed interface is
planar; however, it showed axially growing gas wormholes, which appear equidistantly spaced
(ﬁgure 5a). When the solidiﬁcation rate was increased to 3 micron /second, this morphology is
essentially maintained (ﬁgure 5b). However, when the sample was processed at a rate of 6
mierons/second (ﬁgure Sc), a transitional behavior was seen where spherical-eap bubbles
started to grow at the tips of the wormholes; these bubbles eventually dislodge into the
temperature ﬁeld ahead. This process became more dramatic as the rate was increased to 9
mierons/seeond (ﬁgure 5d).

"
"4","——-'rr.."".:-..“:;.—. 'E’:‘.""‘=‘-;.“.—_‘: L_LhifH-fia: "";i;-;*.':.:ﬁm
1-H.'_'|- n:nu uu.u ' ""?B-EIEI'Fﬂ-n ‘3‘1—l- —
1-i:__i-J-.H.'.-Ly_,_'r 1:I:':.. u __ ""WET 3:. 5—

""_.:=I=:_-_ul.-:I.-_— 1...; . .. 3—,“;

m m _

W M

F F'—

-—-—‘i—l— _ _ _,_,_ ﬂ'_—- '

l... _l-ﬂ ""

##— .—J'_'—'_ - - _

”'— J'-

_ i -|' _ -

Figure 5a Figure 5b

—__ "" .1 * FFHI_H.I""' n. _.J' __ -* -n- 1'
""III: '1"" 'EIIIL- '.|"" tltl- E: ""' "" "" '-:.. '

hi i

_ ""_ __ .
1' ""‘ II. 1r I -_._1
. =2 ' ,
t I i 5:. I 1..
_ i ﬁt —.___—-_I
_.. _ ""‘ -' ‘ FL- ""'|' _I- .
.. +.- ... _ I» J.'.""_--.. -
Figure Sc Figure 5d
Figure 5. Wormhole formation during re-solidiﬁcation, and evolution of bubbles.
a) Observed planar solid/liquid interface solidifying at lum/s showing a
distribution of gas wormholes. (b) Observed interface at a growth rate of 3nm/s.
(C) At 6um/s, spherical-eap bubbles evolve at the tip of the wormholes and are
clearly evident at the interface; these bubbles eventually dislodge into the liquid
ahead ((1) At 9nm/s the bubble growth, separation, and migration up the
temperature gradient is more dramatic (here, a different camera View). The
temperature gradient, as measured from the thermocouple seen in Figure Se, is
26.6Kcm'1.

We feel that the wormhole formation is a consequence of dissolved nitrogen gas, in liquid SCN,

coming out at the solid/liquid interface and forming the little studied liquid —> solid + gas

eutectic reaction, i.e., the so called GASAR process that has been primarily reported [1, 2]

during solidiﬁcation of high pressure hydrogen-metal systems. Brieﬂy, the observed structure

scales With Kurz and Fisher’s [3] evaluation of measured phase spacings that occur in diffusion
controlled “eutectic” type reactions; evaluation of the data is continuing.

Bubble nucleation occurs at the interface. There is a competition between the growth of the

bubble through air absorption from the melt and the overrunning 0f the bubble by the advancing

interface, Where under certain solidiﬁcation rates, the bubble is growing at one end While being
swallowed at the other end by the solid. The consequence is an overly elongated tube-like
wormhole, With a corrugated surface texture. The contact angle on the liquid side can be
anything. Thus the liquid there can be solidiﬁed at any contact angle, giving the wormhole the
corrugated appearance. There is a critical solidiﬁcation rate, beyond Which wormholes Will not

"
"5","be produced; instead the process is terminated by the formation of spherical cap bubbles. These
bubbles dislodge from the interface and migrate into the temperature gradient ahead of them.
The thermoeapillary field around the bubbles aids the process of bubble pinching. Further, the
bubbles are monodisperse in size, because they nucleate fresh at the interface and the pinching
forces are well deﬁned and thermocapillary in origin, much as the quiescent drop formation
problem at the tip of needle 0n the ground, Where the latter mechanism is controlled by gravity.
Theoretical Considerations
Bubble Migration
The intent of this study is to examine the mobility of bubbles in a thermoeapillary force ﬁeld; a
phenomenon, that would otherwise be overwhelmed by buoyancy forces on the ground. It is
well known that bubbles can migrate up a temperature gradient due to thermoeapillary effects.
The associated velocity can be expressed in the simplest form [4] as:
VO = dT/dX R loll (1)
2“
Where V0 is the bubble migration velocity, dT/dX is the driving temperature gradient, 0118 the
variation of surface tension With temperature of the host liquid and n is its dynamic Viscosity.
In derivation of equation 1, it is assumed that the thermal and momentum convective effects on
the bubble motion are negligible. Balasubramaniam and Lavery [5] numerically considered
the general case in Which the thermal convection characterized by the Marangoni number (Ma =
dT/dX IGTI R2 mic; Where K is the thermal diffusivity of the host liquid) and the momentum
convection described by Reynolds number (Re = pVR/tt,; Where p is the density of the host
liquid) are both not negligible. They expressed their results in the form:
V = V0 2f (Ma, Re) (2)
Where the factor 2f approaches 1 for negligible Ma, and Re.
The measured diameters of the large and the small bubble seen in Figure 5 are, respectively
0.53mm and 0.36mm. Their measured velocities are, respectively, 5.6mm/s and 4.1 mm/s. For
the measured temperature gradient of 19.1K/em, and IGTI of 0.108 dyn/cm/K and Viscosity
(assumed constant) of 0.026 g/cm/s, the predicted migration velocities, for the two bubbles
from equation 1, are 10.5 mm/s and 7.1 mm/s, Which are considerably higher than the measured
values.
The Marangoni numbers for the two bubbles are 48 and 22 respectively. Their Reynolds
numbers are small, less than 1. From reference 19, the values of 2f, for the two cases are 0.53
and 0.62 respectively. Taking these into consideration, the predicted values of migration
velocities would be 5.6 mm/s, and 4.4 mm/s, Which are very close to the experimentally
measured values
Wormhole F ormation
The mechanism by Which the bubbles can evolve during re-solidiﬁeation Will be studied
theoretically by numerical means. Consider a melt containing a dissolved gas undergoing
directional solidiﬁcation. If the substance has a higher density in solid state than in liquid state,
as most substances do, the liquid Will experience a reduced pressure due to the contraction upon

"
"6","solidiﬁcation. At reduced pressure and thus reduced solubility, some of the dissolved gas
reappears as bubbles. Nucleation of bubbles is more likely to take place along the solidiﬁcation
front Where it is heterogeneous, than in the liquid bulk Where it is homogeneous.
If a bubble nueleates at an advancing solidiﬁcation front, three possible things can happen.
First, it can be simply overrun by the solidiﬁcation front and trapped in the solid as a bubble; a
scenario that can only be veriﬁed by microscopic examination of the sectioned processed
sample.
As a result of the cooling of the liquid on the side Where solidiﬁcation takes place in directional
solidiﬁcation, there is a temperature gradient in the liquid pointing away from the solid-liquid
interface into the liquid. For a bubble stuck at the solid-liquid interface, since the surface
tension of its gas-liquid interface decreases With temperature, there is a thermooapillary ﬂow
going from the warmer ambient side of the bubble toward the cooler solid-liquid interface.
Hence, second, if the ﬂow is strong enough, it can dislodge the bubble, allowing the latter to
drift into the warmer ambient under the inﬂuence of the same thermooapillary ﬂow. Given a
temperature gradient, the thermooapillary effect is stronger With larger bubbles. Somewhere
between the two regimes, the bubble is trapped on its rear end by the solid, but can manage to
grow fast enough on its front end to escape entrapment by absorbing the gas from the liquid by
diffusion. Hence third, by doing that, the bubble acquires a tubular form in the solid While
maintaining a bubble cap in the liquid at the solidification front. The tubular bubble has many
nicknames, one of them being, ‘Wormhole.’ Materials that are porous With such tubular bubbles
have been formed With metals and hydrogen gas and are known as gas eutectios or GASARs.
Conclusion
Results from the PFMI experiment are being evaluated to promote our understanding of
porosity formation and mobility during controlled directional melting and re-solidiﬁoation in a
microgravity environment. Our results point out the role of thermooapillary forces in bringing
about bubble removal from the interface, and ensuring their migration. During re-solidiﬁoation,
as we vary the solidiﬁcation parameters, the morphology of the solid changes from one
containing entrapped pores to one that is free of pores. This provides an operational Window
whereby the detrimental aspects of porosity entrapment, in samples processed in Space, can
possibly be avoided. The experimental results, followed With a strong theoretical assessment,
can be very beneﬁcial to future microgravity crystal growth experiments.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the kind support provided by the Marshall Space Flight Center, the
PFMI Team, and the Glovebox Team for the smooth execution of this Proj eot. Appreciation is
also expressed to Ms. Nancy Bennett and Mr. Charles Sisk for their assistance With the
preparation of this manuscript.
References
1. A.E. Simone and L]. Gibson, Acta mater., 44 (1996), 1437-1447.
2. J. Kovaoik, Acta mater., 46, (1998), 5413-5422.
3. W. Kurz and DJ. Fisher: Fundamentals of Solidzﬁcation (Switzerland, Trans Tech
Publications, 1986), 110.
4. NO. Young, J.S. Goldstein, and M.J. Block, J. Fluid Mech, 6 (1959), 350.
5. R. Balasubramaniam and J .E. Lavery, Num. Heat T ransfer, A16 (1989), 175.

"
