"","x"
"1","43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2005-917
10 - 13 January 2005, Reno, Nevada
Morphological Evolutlon 0f Dlrectlonal Sohdlﬁeatlon
Interfaces 1n MlcrograVIty: An Analys1s of Model
Experiments Performed 0n the Internatlonal Space Station
L. L. Strutzenberg* and RN. GrugelT
Marshall Space F light Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812
and
R. Trivedii
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 50011
A series of experiments performed using the Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation
(PFMI) apparatus Within the Microgravity Science Glovebox (MSG) facility on board the
International Space Station (188) has provided Video images of the morphological evolution
of a three-dimensional interface in a diffusion controlled regime. The experimental samples,
1 cm inner diameter and approximately 30 cm in length, are ﬁlled With alloys of
succinonitrile (SCN) and water. The compositions of the samples processed and analyzed
are 0.25, 0.5 and 1.0 wt% water. Experimental processing parameters of temperature
gradient and translation speed, as well as camera settings, were remotely monitored and
controlled from the ground Telescience Center (TSC) at the Marshall Space Flight Center.
Images obtained from the on-orbit experiments have been received and are being analyzed.
A ground-based thin-sample directional solidiﬁcation system for correlation to ﬂight
experiments is described. Using this ground-based system, a series of experiments has been
performed for direct comparison With the ﬂight data. The initial results of these
comparisons as well as implications to future microgravity experiments are presented and
discussed.
1. Introduction
Cellular and dendritic microstructures are frequently observed in nature as well as in commercially important
processed materials. Because microstructure determines the properties attained for any given material, it is
vitally important to understand how processing techniques affect microstructure in order to tailor materials With the
desired properties. Even in directional solidiﬁcation processes, in Which the growth conditions may be closely
controlled, the effect of gravity-driven convection promotes non-uniformity of microstructure. Before the effect of
convection can be characterized, a precise understanding of the fundamental physical principles governing the
cellular and dendritic microstructure formation in the diffusive growth regime is needed. To this end a number of
microgravity experiments have been performed 1'4 and additional microgravity investigations have been proposed or
are currently in development.

The opacity of metal alloys precludes easy in situ Visualization of microstructural evolution during solidiﬁcation.
Consequently, to supplement solidiﬁcation research using metal alloys, transparent organic model systems are often
employed both in ground-based researchS'8 and in microgravity experiments9'11 to explore the dynamical evolution
of the cells and dendrites.

The use of thin samples to approximate tWO-dimensional diffusive growth conditions has been Widely reported
and valuable qualitative information regarding the dynamical evolution of the interface morphology as well as the
steady-state cellular and dendritic structures can be gained in such a manner. However, several limitations of this
* Scientist, Science and Technology Directorate, NASA/MSFC/XD42.

T Scientist, Science and Technology Directorate, NASA/MSFC/XD41.
1 Professor, Materials Science and Engineering Department, 100 Wilhelm Hall, Iowa State University.
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
This material is declared a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States.

"
"2","approach have become more apparent as both the theoretical and experimental work in this area has matured. A
series of experiments performed using the Pore Formation and Mobility Investigation (PFMI) apparatus aboard the
International Space Station (ISS) has provided some preliminary data regarding the morphological evolution of a
three—dimensional interface in a diffusion controlled regime. The primary aim of the subject work has been to
analyze the available rnicrograVity experiment data gleaning insight into the dynamics of three—dimensional interface
morphology which has hitherto been unavailable. Comparison of this data with ground—based data obtained using a
thin—sarnple directional solidiﬁcation system will illurninate apparent differences between the ﬂight experiments and
the thin sample experiments, isolating spurious results from thin—sarnple experiments which are an artifact of the
dimensional constraint from true deviations from predicted behaVior. A secondary objective is to suggest follow—on
experiments to be performed during subsequent ﬂight opportunities as well as design elements which should be
incorporated into future ﬂight apparatus.
11. Experimental Apparatus and Procedure

A series of experiments has been performed using the PFMI apparatus within the MicrograVity Science
Glovebox (MSG) facility on board the 188”. These experiments have been correlated to a series of ground—based
thin—sample experiments with like composition and processing conditions. Critical differences between the ﬂight
and ground experiments have been noted in the plane front dynamics of during the initial transient, in the dynamical
evolution of the interface morphology and ﬁnally in the resultant steady—state interface.

A. Flight Experiments

The ﬂight experiment samples were prepared on the ground by ﬁlling glass tubes, 1 cm inner diameter and
approximately 30 cm in length, with alloys of succinonitrile (SCN) and water. While cornpositions ranging from
pure SCN to 1.0 wt% water were prepared and have been processed, the experiments evaluated for this investigation
were limited to O.25wt% and 0.5 wt% water samples. These samples were ﬁlled and sealed under a 450 Torr
nitrogen atmosphere then allowed to solidify. Since the objective of the PFMI investigation is to examine the
mobility of bubbles in a thermocapillary force ﬁeld, the inclusion of bubbles was intended. Extensive testing has
been performed to determine the effect of the nitrogen on the liquidus temperature as this is critical to the interface
dynamics and microstructure forrnation. Each sample includes siX in Sim thermocouples from which a temperature
gradient was measured for each experimental run. The temperature gradients for the experimental runs analyzed
range from 2.5 K/mm to 3.1 K/rnrn.

PFMI thermal charnber establishes a thermal w _ﬁ k _ _ _ J _
gradient along the sample through heating one end of _E-n'I-u: :- ‘- ‘ 1-~""""'—. _ ___:-.-"" .1;-
the sample using a collapsible hot zone in which a ”EWE {13—31. _ _ __I'; """"'- J. i
ﬁxed mounted electrode brush at the end of the sample ([57 _ I-‘Ihﬁ_§m .i' M ii, ‘
forms one end of the zone, and an electrode brush r. E _ rftm .-_,.f__ ' 33w]: e5 -
which translates with the cold stage towards the ﬁxed '_ L *E' dfﬂj-QLE‘ 1;- I! '
mounted brush forms the other. An indium tin oxide __""t-if lf' .5."" f _- *1” Li -'

(ITO) coating along the sample tube allows heating 1. '.' J. “'1‘1 * .l J
along the length of the sample between the two .1 k l \l ' ""1:5 r [r-
electrode brushes when current is passed through the 5.1-: : ' ﬁr uh _. #_'

system. The cold stage, booster heater and rnoveable :5 1. ""' ‘.- ﬁshy . q;
electrode brush are mounted to a translation stage r-ﬂl. -==-. ""' -. ; .

which is able to be commanded from the ground. The _‘.-5 :' 5;? “Tim _’ "" -' :h. 1
interface is illuminated with LEDs and is tracked and "" - ' I!"" i . -- ' ""ﬂ...
recorded with two Video cameras set at 90 degrees

from each other and orthogonal to the sample. These

two Video cameras may be translated independent of Figure 1. The PFMI apparatus as installed in the
the thermal assembly, and may be individually focused Microgravity Science Glovebox aboard the ISS.
and zoomed by ground command.

Zone temperatures, translation speed, camera position, focus and zoom were monitored and controlled from the
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) Telescience Center (TSC) during each experiment run. Real—tirne Video in a
single, selectable View is downlinked to the TSC when possible and recorded on the ground. This near—real—time
(NRT) Video has formed the bulk of the data available for analysis at this time. Portions of each run are recorded on
board the ISS using the ISS Video tape recorder (VTR). The VTR is dumped after each experiment run and recorded
on the ground providing ﬁll—in coverage for times at which real—time video was not available during the run. The

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","primary image data is recorded in two Views for each experiment on Hi-8 tapes. These tapes are to be returned to
the ground for detailed analysis. However, because of downmass limitations, the only Hi-8 tapes currently received
on the ground are for the PFMI-05 experiment and these are only in a single View. Because of this limited
availability of Hi-8 data, preliminary analysis has been initiated using the available NRT and VTR dump Video.

B. Ground Based Thin-Sample Experiments

The ground experiment samples were prepared by ﬁlling glass microslides (internal depth 200 gm, 4 mm width,
~ 60 cm in length) with alloys of succinonitrile (SCN) and water in a vacuum environment assisted by a nitrogen
backpressure to ﬁll the slide. The thickness of the sample is limited by the maximum thickness allowable to
mitigate convection effects13 . The thin sample slides did not contain thermocouples since the effect of the
thermocouple on thermal and solutal ﬁelds at the interface would signiﬁcantly disturb the development of the
interface morphology. Instead, the gradient in the directional solidiﬁcation chamber was well characterized through
multiple experimental runs with a thermocouple inside a succincnitrile-ﬁlled slide of the same dimension. Slides
ﬁlled with pure succincnitrile were located on either side of the sample slide to mark the position of the pure
material melting temperature within the gradient zone on the images obtained. The interface temperature within the
sample slide could thus be calculated at any time during the process.

The ground-based solidiﬁcation system, as is typical of such directional solidiﬁcation apparatus, employs a
stepper motor and a ﬁne pitch ballscrew translation table to translate the sample through stationary hot and cold
zones. The stage translation is monitored by a linear optical encoder capable of measuring position to within 0.05
gm, allowing precise characterization of system velocity ﬂuctuations. The thermal stability and vertical thermal
gradient have also been improved by the inclusion of a thermally conductive PAN carbon ﬁber felt on the upper and
lower surfaces of both the hot and cold blocks. This felt provides an efﬁcient conductive heat path for both the
upper and lower slide surfaces.

The thermal chamber is backlit and the images of the solidifying interface are acquired by a separate computer
using a high resolution (1300 X 1030) Video camera coupled with a Video microscope and a framegrabber card. The
camera and microscope system was tested using a square reticle to assure that no distortion resulted from the
resolution aspect ratio of the digital camera.

111. Initial Results and Analysis

The intent of this study is to examine the various aspects of the development of cellular and dendritic interface
morphologies directional solidiﬁcation in a diffusicn-controlled bulk sample as compared with the thin-sample
experiments generally performed on the ground to determine critical differences. Since thin-sample experiments are
widely used to approximate 2-D diffusive growth conditions in the sample since bulk measurements are not readily
available due to thermosclutal convection in terrestrial experiments, a critical evaluation of the efﬁcacy of this
methodology is warranted. The particular areas to be evaluated include the planar interface dynamics during the
initial transient, the dynamics of the instability and the resultant steady-state microstructure.

The formation of a cellular or dendritic interface during directional solidiﬁcation of an alloy in a temperature
gradient is well known to occur as a result of constitutional supercooling resulting from the build-up of a solute
boundary layer ahead of the solidifying interface. The critical velocity above which a non-planar interface can exist
is given in the simplest form as”:

GD

Va = —

ATO
where G is the imposed thermal gradient, D is the diffusion coefﬁcient in the liquid, and ATO is the freezing range of
the alloy for linear solidus and liquidus lines. Since the critical velocity for the experimental conditions attainable
for the ﬂight experiments is less than 0.1 me/s, it is clear that the pulling velocities within the 0.6 to 1.0 pun/s should
eventually result in the break—up of the interface. In fact, for the majority of the experiments performed, a dendritic
microstructure has resulted. However, the time to reach steady-state at the lower growth velocities is larger than the
time available for the on-crbit experiment which could result in a planar interface remaining at the end of the run.
The dynamics of the planar interface during the initial transient as the velocity of the interface increases to the
imposed pulling velocity signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the composition proﬁle in the solid. The point during this transient
at which the interface break—up occurs determines the dynamical conditions under which the instability will amplify

and ultimately affects the steady-state microstructure which evolves.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","A direct comparison of the resultant j
microstructures for equivalent experimental 2f,"" '7‘34'“) :3” “2"". 5‘) 3?;f’gf,
processing conditions in the ﬂight and ground 3’93: s: "" ‘3; {.50. 3"" ﬁ’é E)“
samples reveals significant differences in the 3 ‘
interface morphology. As an example, the PFMI- ‘
15A experiment, with a composition of O.25wt% x
water was processed in a gradient of 3 K/mm with an L- .
imposed pulling velocity, VP, of 1 Mm/s. The ' é’
emergence of dendrites at 142 minutes from the k
initiation of translation is shown in Figure 2a. The 1:,
“denuded zone” to the left of the emerging dendrites f.
is the result of planar growth during the initial r
transient. The dendrites then continue to grow until 5‘ _
the steady-state dendrite spacing and tip position is i ‘ '
attained by 200 minutes as shown in Figure 2b. It “—
should be noted that the protuberance at the interface —
in the 2b image results from the formation of glgure 23‘ PFdMIcgliA ?:geriment.
porosity behind the interface as a result of nitrogen mag??? 9f en r1 es mm.“ 6S
intentionally introduced into the sample to meet the after mztzatzon Ofstage translatzon at I Mm/S'
primary experimental objective. Dendrite spacing "" 4’33? --
measurements which were taken did not include the {5'1 (""J:O: 3Hi‘,33?{4 “7,1"";
void region and the measurements taken were not (1' (1“; - :4“ '1’ i (‘3 . 7-? 5‘39: 1;
shown to be signiﬁcantly affected by this localized ; \ wk
disturbance. The corresponding thin-sample 7’ “ ’ 3'-
experiment which was processed with the same G \WJP'
and Vp developed a cellular rather than a dendritic Ex ;,~ y
interface as shown in Figure 20. In addition, the time - ‘ ""
t0 break-up was longer for the ground-based ?“ {25 ',
experiment and an analysis of the comparative planar E "" i ,
interface recoil during the initial transient has E} ‘-
revealed that the solute buildup ahead of the interface 5,? J ‘ “I
for the bulk ﬂight sample was signiﬁcantly steeper 9‘ T '
than for the corresponding ground-based thin-sample. "" ° ‘ ’ ‘

For the cellular interface shown in 20, the cells D
have a spacing of 142-164 Mm which is less than the Figure 2b. PFMI-lSA.
200 Mm gap of the microslide. This is therefore a Steady-state dendritic growth 200 minutes
condition for which the thin sample is not directly after initiation Ofstage translation at 1 Mm/S.
affected by the dimensionality of the microslide.
That is, the slide is not so thin with respect to the cell
spacing that the cells are ﬂattened and consequently __
forced to a wider spacing or as has been shown
recently15 forced to a dendritic form. Nor is the slide
of a thickness signiﬁcantly greater than the cell
spacing, which can be conﬁrmed in Figure 20 by
noting that no vertical instability appears behind the
cellular interface as would be the case. However,
even in such a “best case”, the 2-D and 3-D
morphology are shown to differ. This difference
highlights the importance of the dynamical
conditions at the interface break-up in determining
the resultant morphology. Following the sequence
shown, VP was increased to 3 mn/s. Spacing Figure 2c. Ground Based Thin Sample.
adjustment occurred in the ﬂight sample and the Cellular in te rface remaining 196 minutes
ground based sample became dendritic. The spacing ft r tr 1 t' . itiation a t 1 /S
of the ﬂight sample decreased, as would be expected. 6? 6 ans a mm m m '

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","For the ground sample however, the spacing increased more than would be anticipated even for a transition from
cellular to dendritic form. As the spacing increased as a result of the transition from cells to dendrites, the spacing
exceeded the 200 Mm microslide gap causing an exaggerated spacing increase and further highlighting the
shortcomings of using thin samples to obtain quantitative data for comparison With theoretical models.
IV. Conclusion

Image data provided by the PFMI experiment is being analyzed and correlated to image data obtained using a
ground-based thin-sample directional solidiﬁcation system. It is clear from the analysis performed thus far that no
unambiguous quantitative evaluation of initial planar front dynamics, dynamical condition for the planar interface
instability and steady-state primary dendrite spacing can be adequately obtained using thin samples so that
solidiﬁcation of bulk samples in a microgravity environment is required. The PFMI image data has provided key
information allowing for rough comparison With the ground-based thin-sample images. However, for critical spacing
measurements, a View from the end of the sample tube Will be required. Also, during the initial transient, the
“denduded zone” Which emerges as a result of planar growth makes the interface position quite difﬁcult to track
given the ﬁxed LED lighting system employed by the PFMI. For an experimental apparatus speciﬁcally designed to
image the interface, an adjustable lighting or ﬁlter system could greatly improve the ability to resolve the interface
adequately at the point of instability. Provision by PFMI of this existing relevant image data during the design
phase of the DSIP experiment Will signiﬁcantly enhance the optimization of the future ﬂight experiment. It should
also be noted that the ability to receive real-time Video and the ability to control the translation, temperature settings,
and camera motion and magniﬁcation in real-time has been Vital to obtaining the images of the interface.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful for the support provided by the Marshall Space Flight Center, Iowa State University,
and the PFMI and MSG Teams. Appreciation is expressed to Ms. Dawn Lyons and Ms. Debbie Solomon at MSFC
for their help With conversion of VHS and DVD source Video to still images for analysis. The contributions of one
of the authors (RT) was supported by the Ofﬁce of Biological and Physical Sciences, NASA.

References

1Billia, B., Jaingotchian, H., FaVier, J .J . and Camel, D., “Cellular Solidiﬁcation of Pb-Ti Alloys During the Dl-WL-GHF 02
Experiment,” Proceedings 0fthe Nordemey Symposium on Scientiﬁc Results 0fthe German Spacelab Mission DI , edited by PR.
Sahin, R. J ansen and M.H. Keller, German Ministry of Research and Technology (BMFT), Bonn, Germany, 1986, pp. 230-236.
Periodicals

2Dupouy, M.D., Camel, D. and FaVier, J.J., “Natural Convective Effects in Directional Dendritic Solidiﬁcation of Binary
Metallic Alloys: Dendritic Array Morphology,” Journal oferystal Growth, Vol. 126, 1993, pp. 480-492.

3Drevet, B., Camel, D., Malinejac, C., FaVier, J .J ., Thi, H.N., Li, Q., and Billia, B., “Cellular and Dendritic Solidiﬁcation of
Al-Li Alloys During the D2 Mission,” Advances in Space Research, Vol. 16, No. 7, 1996, pp. 173-176.

4Thi, H.N., Drevet, B., Debierre, J .M., Camel, D., Dabo, Y. and Billia, B., “Preparation of the Initial Solid-Liquid Interface
and Melt in Directional Solidiﬁcation,” Journal oferystal Growth, Vol. 253, 2003, pp. 539-548.

5Jackson, K.A. and Hunt, J .D., “Transparent Compounds That Freeze Like Metals,” Acta Metallurgica, Vol. 13, 1965, pp.
1212-1215.

6Eshelinan, M.A., Seetharainan, V., and Trivedi, R., “Cellular Spacings — I. Steady-State Growth,” Acta Metallurgica, Vol.
36, No. 4, 1988, pp. 1165-1174.

7Lee, J .T.C, Tsiveriotis, K., and Brown, R.A., “Spatioteinporal Chaos Near the Onset of Cellular Growth During Thin-Filin
Solidiﬁcation of a Binary Alloy,” Journal oferystal Growth, Vol. 121, 1992, pp. 536-542.

8Trivedi, R., Shen, Y., and Liu, S., “Cellular-to-Dendritic Transition During the Directional Solidiﬁcation of Binary Alloys,”
Metallurgical and Materials T ransactions A, Vol. 34A, February, 2003, pp. 395-401.

9Kauerauf, B., Zimmermann, G., Rex, S., Mathes, M., and Grote, F., “Directional Cellular Growth of Succinonitrile-0.075
wt% Acetone Bulk Samples. Part 1: Results of Space Experiments,” Journal ofCrystal Growth, Vol. 223, 2001, pp. 265-276.

10Koss, M.B., LaCombe, J .C., Tennenhouse, L.A., Glicksman, ME. and Winsa, E.A., “Dendritic Growth Tip Velocities and
Radii of Curvature in Microgravity,” Metallurgical and Materials T ransactions A, Vol. 30A, No. 12, 1999, pp. 3177-3190.

11LaCombe, J.C., Koss, M.B., Glicksman, M.B., “Nonconstant Tip Velocity in Microgravity Dendritic Growth,” Physical
Review Letters, Vol. 83, No. 15, 1999, pp. 2997-3000.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","12R.N. Grugel and A.V. Anilkumar: “Bubble Formation and Transport during Microgravity Materials Processing:
Model Experiments on the Space Station”, AIAA paper #2004-0627, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting &
Exhibit, 5-8 J anuary 2004/Ren0, Nevada.

13Somboonsuk, K., Mason, J .T. and Trivedi, R., “Interdendritic Spacing: Part 1. Experimental Studies,” Metallurgical
TransactiansA, Vol. 15A, June, 1984, pp. 967-975.

14Tiller, W.A., J ackson, K.A., Rutter, J .W., and Chalmers, B., “The Redistribution of Solute Atoms During the Solidiﬁcation
ofMetals,” Acta Metallurgica, V01. 1, July, 1953, pp. 428-437.

15 Liu, S., Suk, Myung-Jin, Fabietti, L. and Trivedi, R., “The Effect of Dimensionality 0n Microstructures in Directionally
Solidiﬁed SCN—Salol Alloys”, in: Solidiﬁcation Pracesses and Micmstructures, Ed. By M. Rappaz, C. Beckermann and R.
Trivedi, TMS, Warrendale, PA (2004), pp. 211-218.

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
