"","x"
"1","44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit AIAA 2006-1 140
9 - 12 January 2006, Reno, Nevada
Isolated Wormhole Growth and Evolutlon durlng
Dlrectlonal Sohdlﬁcatlon 1n Small Dlameter Cyllndrlcal
Channels: Prellmlnary Experlments
Matthew C. COX* and A.V. AnilkumarT
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, T N, 37235
Richard N. Grugeli
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, 35812
And
William H. H0fmeister§
University of T ennessee Space Institute, T ullahoma, T N, 37358
Controlled directional solidification experiments have been performed in a novel facility
using small diameter capillary channels, Where gravity effects are minimal. With pure
liquid succinonitrile loaded With excess nitrogen gas as the study material, individual
cylindrical gaseous wormholes have been isolated, and the effects of step changes in
processing pressure and processing speed have been investigated. In addition, using the
same facility, the thermocapillary-induced coalescence of adjacent wormholes has been
investigated.
Nomenclature
P = processing pressure
V = processing speed
KH = Henry’s constant
C0 = concentration
G = temperature gradient
1. Introduction
( iROUND-BASED investigations of pore formation and growth during solidiﬁcation, in general, Will be affected
by gravity-driven bulk convection in the melt and by buoyancy forces tending to left the bubbles. These
complications can be eliminated by performing directional solidiﬁcation experiments in Space. The recent Pore
Formation and Mobility Investigation (PFMI) experiments performed on board the International Space Station
methodically investigated pore formation and growth using the transparent metal analog material succinonitrile
(SCN) loaded With an excess amount of dissolved nitrogen gasl. In order to perform similar pore formation
experiments in a ground-based laboratory, the effects of bulk convection and buoyant bubble rise must be minimized
or eliminated. One way to accomplish this objective is to reduce the scale of the experiment. This approach has
been previously employed by using tWO-dimensional Hele-Shaw type cells to study the evolution of interfacial
morphology for a variety of materials and a110ys2'4. Jamgotchian et al. have observed the growth of elongated
acetone vapor bubbles at the solidiﬁcation interface during directional solidiﬁcation of SCN—acetone alloys.
* Graduate Student, Mechanical Engineering, PO. BOX 351592 Station B; Graduate Student Member
T Research Associate Professor, Mechanical Engineering, PO. BOX 351592 Station B
i Scientist, Exploration Division, MC XD 41; Senior Member
§ Research Professor, Center for Laser Applications
1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Copyright © 2006 by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc. All rights reserved.

"
"2","Similarly, Akamatsu and Faivre6 have observed bubble growth during directional solidiﬁcation of CBr4—C2Cl6 alloy.
These investigations demonstrate the formation and growth of elongated vapor bubbles trapped between the upper
and lower walls of the Hele—Shaw cell. Each of these investigations using the thin—ﬁlm conﬁguration provides
excellent Visualization of the solid—liquid interface and elongated bubble growth; however, each study is limited in
its scope by the two—dimensional nature of the experiments.

The goal of the current ground—based investigation is to perform controlled directional solidiﬁcation experiments
in small diameter cylindrical capillary channels, where the growth, evolution, and interaction of three—dimensional
gaseous wormholes can be observed. Similar to the PFMI experiment, SCN samples were loaded with an excess
amount of nitrogen gas and then directionally solidiﬁed in our novel directional solidiﬁcation apparatus capable of
processing cylindrical capillary samples. As part of this investigation, an innovative experimental procedure for
isolating individual wormholes has been developed. By studying the growth of isolated wormholes in response to
processing parameters, we hope to better understand the process of pore formation in larger bulk crystal growth
experiments. The current investigation introduces processing pressure and solidiﬁcation speed as in Sim control
parameters for inﬂuencing wormhole geometry during porous crystal growth.

11. Experimental Setup

As part of this investigation, a novel directional solidiﬁcation apparatus has been developed. The apparatus is
shown in Fig. 1. The Bridgman—type directional solidiﬁcation facility consists of a hot side maintained at a uniform
temperature, TH, and a cold side maintained at a lower uniform temperature TC. The two blocks are separated by a
ﬁxed test section of 10 mm. TH and TC are independently controlled by circulating heated water from separate
temperature—controlled baths through each side. The baths maintain water temperature to a precision of iOJK. The
temperature in each block is monitored using an Omega RTD—TFD thin—ﬁlm surface temperature sensor with a
precision of i0.01K. The temperature sensors are mounted in recesses milled into the surface of each block on the
side facing the test section, and are sealed in place with a thermally conductive epoxy, as shown in Fig. 1a.

(a) FRONT VIEW
—r—_—— énlilumqmwunmm
. , r . a 2% i v27 -‘ '

a) b)

Figure 1. a) Schematic of temperature gradient apparatus; b) Photograph of temperature gradient

apparatus.

Each block consists of an upper and a lower caVity through which water is circulated. A removable aluminum
insert is sandwiched between the upper and lower caVity in each block. The insert has a cylindrical groove through
its center, which holds in place a cylindrical glass capillary tube containing the processing sample. Each block is
surrounded on all sides, except the side facing the test section, with a thick ceramic ﬁber jacket to provide efﬁcient
insulation.

The temperature gradient apparatus is mounted under an optical microscope for direct observation of the solid—
liquid interface during directional solidiﬁcation. A ﬁber optic light is placed directly below the capillary tube to
illuminate the sample. A transparent Lucite window is placed directly above and below the capillary tube to
eliminate the presence of convective air currents around the sample.

Directional solidiﬁcation experiments were performed in the temperature gradient apparatus using borosilicate
glass capillary tubes ﬁlled with SCN. The typical capillary tube inner diameter used was 1.0mm. Each sample was
ﬁlled with ultra—pure SCN obtained from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Capillary sample tubes

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"3","were ﬁlled under vacuum to avoid atmospheric moisture contamination, using a special apparatus provided by
MSFC7. The SCN—ﬁlled glass capillary tubes were then conﬁgured for nitrogen gas addition and pressure control.
The samples were ﬁtted on each end with a 22—gauge stainless steel tube and sealed with a vacuum grade epoxy. The
steel tubes were coupled to a ﬂexible pressure hose for online pressure control during processing.

During processing, a sample tube containing SCN was translated through the temperature gradient apparatus by
a micro—stepper motor. The stepper motor is coupled to a linear translation stage, which is rigidly attached to the
sample capillary tube. The motor, linear stage and pushrod are mounted on an X—y—z positioning platform allowing
precision alignment of the motor assembly with the capillary tube. Temperature and pressure measurements,
pressure control, stepper motor control, and image acquisition were accomplished using a PC—based LabVIEW
interface.

111. Experimental Procedure

Before each experiment, it was necessary to ensure that a sufﬁcient amount of nitrogen gas was dissolved in the
melt. This was done through a constant pressure gas addition process. During this process, the sample was loaded
into the temperature gradient apparatus and connected on each side to an ultra—pure, high pressure N2 line. The entire
SCN sample was then melted and held under N2 pressure for approximately 18 hours. Figure 2 shows a pressure
proﬁle for the gas addition process.

From Henry’s Law, an equilibrium gas concentration, C0, is achieved in the melt according to the equation:

C0 = P/KH (1)
Where P is the applied pressure, and KH is the Henry’s constant for SCN at a given temperature. Solubility of N2 in
SCN is highest near its melting point, and it decreases as temperature increases. We have observed that as SCN
absorbs N2, its melting point decreases. For this reason, the imposed melt temperature was systematically lowered
during the gas addition process. The Inaj ority 0f the gas addition process was performed at a melt temperature 2 t0 3
degrees lower than the initial melting temperature of pure SCN. This process allowed a sufﬁcient amount of gas to
be dissolved in the melt for a given pressure.

Upon completion of the gas addition process, a solid—liquid interface is established by resetting the temperature
ﬁeld to the desired processing TH and TC temperature values, while keeping the pressure constant. Changing the
temperature ﬁeld effectively partially quenches the sample in a unidirectional manner from the cold side toward the
hot side. The resulting solidiﬁcation interface stabilizes at a determined location in the gradient corresponding to the
melting temperature of the SCN containing N2. The presence of bubbles in the quenched solid region demonstrates
that the liquid has a high concentration of gas dissolved in it. Figure 3 shows an example of bubbles trapped in the
quenched solid region shortly after the quench process in a capillary tube with an inner diameter of 200nm.

Many of the bubbles trapped during this process may be in contact with the solid—liquid interface, forming a
triple point where a N2 gas bubble is in contact with both the solid and liquid SCN, in the form of a bubble cap on
the interface. If directional solidiﬁcation is initiated from this situation, each bubble in contact with the interface
will form an independent wormhole, as shown in Fig. 4. The white scale bar in Fig. 4 represents approximately
50pm. This type of growth is similar to the multiple wormhole growth observed in the PFMI experiments.

76
75.75
g 75.5
a 75.25
g 75 E
3 74.75
I.IJ
E 74.5
74.25
74
0 2 4 6 8 1O 12 14 16 18 20
TIME (HOUR) . . . .
Figure 2. Pressure control during gas addition Flgure 3' NTultlple bubbles trapped 1n SOhd
after quenchlng.
process.
3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"4","Figure 4. Multiple wormholes formed during directional
solidiﬁcation.

The objective of the current investigation is to examine the relationship between processing pressure, processing
speed, and wormhole size. Multiple wormhole growth, as shown in Fig. 4, is not suitable for this investigation
because each wormhole has a separate bubble cap that Will induce a three—dimensional thermocapillary ﬂow pattern
ahead of the interface. Adjacent ﬂow patterns Will interact, thus causing each wormhole to inﬂuence the growth of
neighboring wormholes. As a result, multiple wormholes have a tendency to coalesce, as Will be shown later in the
results section. This behavior makes it difﬁcult to isolate the effects of a change in processing pressure or processing
speed on wormhole growth.

In order to properly evaluate the desired effects, it is necessary to isolate a single, three—dimensional wormhole.
We have observed that a speciﬁc set of quenching parameters results in the formation of radially centered core
bubbles in the quenched solid. By identifying an isolated core bubble and positioning the capillary sample in the
gradient such that the core bubble is in the proximity of the solid—liquid interface, it is possible to use the core
bubble as a seed for isolated wormhole growth. When the solid—liquid interface is near the core bubble, a local melt
region, or meltcap, forms between the bubble and the interface. We observed that the meltcap naturally grows away
from the bubble toward the interface (Fig. 5a).

Figure 5. a) Meltcap formation; b) Bubble expansion into melt cavity; c) Eventual bubble attachment to
the solid-liquid interface.

Once the meltcap makes contact With the interface, a melt cavity is formed, and the bubble expands into the
cavity (Fig. 5b) because the gas pressure inside the trapped bubble is greater than the hydrostatic pressure in the
melt. At this point, slowly lowering the control pressure on the melt results in a further volumetric expansion of the
bubble. This method is used to “draw out” the bubble and to establish a hemispherical bubble cap on the solid—
liquid interface (Fig. Sc)

Once the hemispherical bubble cap is established, directional solidiﬁcation is initiated by translating the capillary
tube at a controlled rate. Under controlled processing conditions, the bubble cap Will remain attached to the
solidiﬁcation interface during growth. As the interface grows, dissolved gas in the melt diffuses across the bubble
cap, and a cylindrical wormhole is formed behind the advancing interface. We refer to this process as steady—state
isolated wormhole growth. This procedure Will consistently produce a cylindrical, isolated wormhole growing near
the center of the capillary tube.

4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"5","IV. Results and Discussion

Controlled directional solidiﬁcation experiments were performed to evaluate the relationship between processing
pressure, processing speed, and wormhole diameter. During the experiments, an isolated, cylindrical, three—
dimensional wormhole was subj ected to a step increase in pressure and a step increase in processing speed following
steady—state constant diameter growth. The results of the experiments consist of a series of images captured from
digital Video recorded during the experiments.

A. Experiment 1: Effect of Pressure Step Increase

Figure 6 shows the response of the wormhole to a 2.5 psi pressure step increase applied to the steady state
wormhole grown in Experiment 1. Throughout this experiment, the processing speed was held constant at
V=1.0pm/s. The response of the isolated wormhole t0 the pressure step occurred in two phases. During the ﬁrst
phase, the wormhole diameter decreased. The pressure increase caused the bubble cap to decrease in volume. The
volumetric reduction of the bubble cap resulted in a change of the contact angle between the bubble cap and the
local interface (Fig 6b). As the interface continued to grow at 1.0pm/s, the wormhole diameter decreased until the
contact angle returned to near perpendicular with the local interface (Fig. 60).

~"""""" mm . _____, . A aggrﬂ; ._,.. “~51.” *_ ‘3
55‘ .F‘s. - “:3 f. ""i 12"","" ' <3 9 4,4 ' J"": i
5:, - , .43 4' *-» ""~§
4 4, ”3 WW "" 5“” .
"" ‘ . 3% 4. "" * -
—
a) b) c)
‘T‘fr-‘LI'L- ! ﬁ , < . :4» - I ‘ .__ . .91.. ‘1'. i

‘3' 4'; V _ 337
d) e) 1)
Figure 6. a-c) First phase of wormhole response to a step increase in processing pressure; d-t) Second
phase of wormhole response.

During the second phase of the wormhole response, we observed that the wormhole diameter slowly increased to a
value near that of its original size, and then continued to grow at the original steady—state diameter (Fig. 6d). The white
scale bar in Fig 6a represents approximately 50pm.

B. Experiment 2: Effect of Processing Speed Step Increase

A second experiment was performed to evaluate the effect of a step increase in processing speed on wormhole
diameter. During this experiment, the processing speed was instantaneously changed from 1.0pm/s t0 2.0pm/s, and
the wormhole response was recorded. For this experiment, the pressure was held constant. The response of the
isolated wormhole t0 the increase in processing speed occurred into two phases. During the ﬁrst phase, the
wormhole diameter decreased (Fig. 7b), and then it eventually recovered its original size in the second phase.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"6","WW a

h ‘ M“? , , ‘ <v'""""7'~€.il '- -

—

a) b)
”1; 9’ 1""” . J '2"": _ ."". .. i - ‘
Am] ._ AL“
"" ”w -'-

» , ‘4.- 7; ~ “27""“ , ‘ ’ -

II

c) d)
Figure 7. a,b) First phase of the response of an isolated wormhole to a step increase
in processing speed from V=1.0um/s t0 V=2.0um/s; c,d) Second phase of wormhole
response.

It is important to note the change in interface position in Fig. 7. The recoil 0f the interface position in Fig. 7b is
consistent with previously observed recoil of a solid—liquid interface during directional solidiﬁcation of SCN
subjected to a similar rise in processing speed7. The response of the isolated wormhole t0 the step increase in
processing speed is similar to the response observed during Experiment 1. After the ﬁrst phase of the wormhole
response, the wormhole diameter increased to a value near that of the original diameter. Figure 7c and Fig. 7d show
the second phase of the wormhole response to an increase in processing speed.

C. Experiment 3: Wormhole Coalescence

An additional experiment was performed to investigate the behavior of two wormholes independently attached to
the solid—liquid interface and growing adjacent to one another. This experiment was performed in a 1.0mm I.D.
capillary tube in a gradient of 2 K/mm. For this experiment, we held the processing speed constant at V=1.5pm/s.
Figure 8 shows the growth and coalescence of two neighboring wormholes. The observed wormhole coalescence
is a result of thermocapillary ﬂow interactions between the two wormholes.

- -
a) b) c)
Figure 8. a) Steady-state double wormhole growth at a constant processing speed; b) Adjacent wormhole
bubble caps make contact and coalesce; c) Evolution of a single wormhole.
6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
"7","V. Comments

This preliminary investigation has shown the response of an isolated cylindrical wormhole to a step increase in
processing pressure and a step increase in processing speed in our novel apparatus. The observed response is
characterized by an initial phase of diameter reduction, followed by a secondary phase of increasing diameter. The
initial response is probably directly related to the changes in the near-ﬁeld diffusion-based gas concentration
equilibrium around the bubble cap, Whereas, the steady-state response is related to the re-establishment of the
equilibrium through the gas source on the liquid side. The observed coalescence of two wormholes growing
adjacent to one another is related to the thermocapillary ﬂow-based Bernoulli effect of lowered pressure between the
bubbles. A detailed experimental study of the effects of the processing parameters on wormhole growth is ongoing.

References

1R.N. Grugel, A.V. Anilkumar, and MC. COX, “Observation of an aligned gas-solid eutectic during controlled directional
solidiﬁcation aboard the International Space Station - Comparison with ground-based studies,” AIAA-2005-919, 43rd AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, J anuary 10-13, 2005.

2K.A. Jackson and J .D. Hunt, “Transparent compounds that freeze like metals,” Acta. Metal]. 13 (1965) 1212.

3D. Ma, “Development of dendrite array growth during alternately changing solidiﬁcation condition,” J. Crystal Growth 260
(2004) 580.

4J.T. Lee and RA. Brown, “Experimental study of the planar-to-cellular transition during thin-ﬁlm directional solidiﬁcation:
observation of the long-time-scale dynamics of microstructure formation,” Phys. Rev. B 47 (9) (1993) 4937.

5H. Jamgotchian, R. Trivedi, and B. Billia, “Interface dynamics and coupled growth in directional solidiﬁcation in presence
ofbubbles,” J. Crystal Growth 134 (1993) 181-195.

6S. Akamatsu, and G. Faivre, “Residual-impurity effects in directional solidiﬁcation: long-lasting recoil 0f the front and
nucleation-growth of gas bubbles,” J. Phys. 1 France 6 (1996) 503-507.

7L. Strutzenberg, “Plane-front dynamics and pattern formation in diffusion-controlled directional solidiﬁcation of alloys,”
Ph.D. Dissertation, Materials Science Department, Iowa State UniV., Iowa City, IA 52242 (2004).

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

"
