"","x"
"1","’ i7""
, Approaches In the Desngn of a Space Plant Cultivation Faculty i
; for ArabldOpSlS Thallana r,
3333‘; Gerard Heyenga, Louis Stodieck and Alex Hoehn 33
3 University of Colorado, BioServe Space Technologies
3 Mark Kliss
3 Z} , NASA Ames Research Center 53
3;; :; Cameron Blackford 3
S3 '3; Science and Technology Corp.
{ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION 3
-.§;The present suite of advanced space plant cultivation Significant progress has been made in the development 3
fifacilities require a significant level of resources to launch of space flight plant growth facilities, which have in- :3
i and maintain in flight. The facilities are designed to ac- creased in sophistication and size in recent years to ac-
ficommodate a broad size range of plant species and are, commodate a broad size and species range Of plants.
therefore, not configured to support the specific growth The facilities typically occupy a double mid-deck volume j:
gearequirements of small plant species such as Arabidopsis and require considerable resources to launch, power 3
thaliana at maximum efficiency with respect to mass and and maintain. In addition, crew time is needed to support,
ii power. The facilities are equally not configured to sup- sowing and plant tissue harvesting procedures. The
port automated plant harvesting or tissue processing small plant species A. thaliana, which is an important 3;
procedures, but rely on crew intervention and time. The space flight model organism, has modest growth mainte- 33
? recent reorganization of both spaceflight opportunities nance requirements 80d underutilizes the support ca-
and allocation of limited in-flight resources demand that pacity 0f the present suite of space flight plant growth ‘~
'3} experiments be conducted with optimal efficiency. The facilities, specifically with respect to the vegetative
L33 ' emergence of A. thaliana as a dominant Space ﬂight growth phase of the organism. The species could be =
’3 model organism utilized in research on vegetative and effectively supported in a more compact and operation-
reproductive phase biology provides strong justification ally efficient manner. The recent rescheduling, and con- f
L-yior the establishment of a dedicated cultivation system solidation of launch and in-flight resources limits the op-
3‘ for this species. This paper presents work on the design portunity for many plant growth facilities to be accommo— -‘
ofa small plant cultivation facility directed at supporting dated on the International Space Station ('33) and em- 3
research on the vegetative growth phase of A. thaliana. phasizes the need for greater efficiency in the implemen-
.f ‘ The design of the facility is based on the use of existing tation of plant research studies. An automated compact :
.g . space flight hardware, and configured to support the fully plant growth facility specifically configured towards the
1;? automated germination of seed, cultivation of plants, and cultivation of small plant species such as Arabidopsis 3-
final termination of plant growth by chemical fixation and would enable high operational efficiency and compatibii- 3
~ preservation of planttissue_ ity with the current level of flight resources presently 33
available. A compact design would also present the op- ;3
portunity to implement automated tissue processing
procedures and alleviate the need for crew time, which is 3
7 “ not feasible in the existing suite of space flight plant 13
j growth chambers. 3
'3 1

"
"2","This paper presents work on the design of a small plant MOB'AS AND ICM HARDWARE SYSTEMS, me
growth facility dedicated towards the cultivation of the ma
vegetative phase of A. thaliana. The facility is based on Thé MOBIAS system typically consists of six experiment zor
the adaptation of an existing space flight hardware sys- trays arranged in a stack, shown in figure 1. Each tray is phit
tem known as the Multiple Orbital Bioreactor with Instru- 30 x 27 x 3 cm. in dimension and consists of (a) an in- 3;.” me
mentation and Automated Sampling (MOBIAS), devei- strument bay which provides preprogramed or teiemetric in 1
oped by BioServe Space Technologies. MOBIAS is a controlled pump and valve fluid transfer capability (1.5- low
flight qualified facility which was designed to support cell 3.5 ml / min.), (b) a cell/ tissue culture chamber, (c) media pot
culture type research (Simmons et al., 2002). and waste or sampling bags which have a 20 — 150 m1. mil
storage capacity, and (d) adistinct low temperature zone ” net
with independent adjustable temperature control (-4°C to dra
EXPERIMENTAL 45°C) typically used to accommodate the sampling bags. 39!
The MOBIAS system is typically maintained in the ICM 5 the
The proposed Arabidopsis plant cultivation facility con- incubator facility. c01
sists of an assembly of subsystem elements, which sup—
port the automated cultivation and manipulation of plant The BioServe developed ICM is a single locker contain- Ur
material. These subsystem elements are grouped into ment facility, which can accommodate a variety of science int
three categories based on their association with either hardware systems such as MOBIAS. The facility has a so
the direct plant containment vessel referred to as the total experiment volume of up to 27 liters and provides a urt
‘piant cultivation module’ (PCM), the supporting Multiple thermally controlled environment (4°C— 37°C ). The facil- I01
Orbital Bioreactor with Instrumentation and Automated ity also provides interface control and data acquisition ba
Sampling (MOBIAS) hardware system, and the overall capabilities (Hoehn et al., 1999). Various illumination co
experiment incubator and containment vessel referred to sources may also be accommodated within the ICM and me
as the Isothermal Containment Module’(lCM). used to support photosynthetic cultures with light levels be
from 100 — 200 pmol s‘1 m“. i plz
i he
The combined MOBIAS and ICM hardware systems are m
%«§_ capable of supporting the controlled thermal and illumi- tht
t nation requirements for A. thaliana (typically 18°C -— 23°C thl
9% and 100 —200 pmol 3.1 m-1 illumination respectively). In

{ft J,” 9., addition, the MOBIAS hardware may be used to support
i.g- s‘ ”zed seed as a means *0 initiate time course 3990' germi'
W *2 ﬁgs also be used to support the controlled immersion and
0.}ﬁxx’ﬁg: cherhical fixation of planthMthrough the transfer of fixative
__ “ m_j; f"" ﬂ”), ,, diffusuon rate of RNAlater TM into A. thaliana leaf tissue *
., 4} "" _} i; Wilyﬂ' used for genomic an alysis is relatively slow (20-40 min—
WM"" _ 2}» f}, utes) in comparison to the cellular turnover rate of RNA,
9% —' ' ,2? .55.; and represents an experiment limitation. The ability to
., ass; may be used to reduce metabolic and gene expression .
its» activity in tissue during the fixation process and thus help
optimize the preservation of tissue for genomic analysis.
' PLANT CULTIVATION MODULE ( PCM ) E
Figure 1. A Multiple Orbital Bioreactor with Instrumenta- E
“0"" and Automated Sampling (MOB'AS) unit is shown. The plant growth cultivation module (PCM) is designed E
Each of the six stacked trays consists of an instrument to fully integrate with and utilize the various support ca- E
bay, 09” culture cassette, media and sampling bags. pabilities provided by the MOBIAS and ICM hardware 1

systems. The PCM dimensions ( 13.0 x 20.5 x 5.0 cm.) I
can be accommodated on the MOBIAS tray platform as ' .
shown in figure 2. The PCM is the direct plant contain- F'
ment vessel and is compartmentalized into six discrete E 3‘
plant cultivation chambers. Each chamber is segregated i a'

into an upper aerial zone and a lower root zone compart- ll

ment using a partition plate. The plates are light imper— E

2 i

"
"3","lI meab'e and have a central 9°“ through WhiCh 5‘ seed A L' h A 32'“f====""1*i.i.i.i;i::7:i:i:ii::i:i:i:i:i:i:i:f:iif:f:fsé;52:?:it:;?:f:iii:i::iz::i;i;i:i:if:i:i:ii'i'i;ff"":'i'i'i:i'i'i'i'i:i:i:i:::'ii:‘ft'i‘ii'ri'a:s
may be positioned with access to both the aerial and root ( ) '9 t. rray
t zone compartments. Seed are immobilized on a hydro- Aenal Zone
; philic glass fiber mesh to ensure appropriate seed align- ROOt Zone Ia”.
- ment, and orientation of emerging root and shoot tissue
= in the absence of gravity (Heyenga et al., 2000). The
- lower chamber compartments accommodate root sup- (3) Pre-Cultivation Chemical Fixative
1 port material e.g. so“, which prowdes the source of plant Phase Reservoir
. mineral nutrients. Each lower chamber root zone is con-
t dration of the root matrix material and seed, initiating IMIII
. 1 seed germination. Seed germination and the onset of _
| the plant ‘cultivation phase’ may therefore be initiated on Water Reservow
command in each individual chamber of the PCM. (C) M ii
Ph§§e
- Un|ike the root zone, the upper cham ber ae rial zones are 3?i-Iffii'fi'fjiffIEff:Iiiffffffifiiifffffflifﬂl:if:I:fI:fliiliiijﬁf:3:23:23???
2 inter-connected in series and may be filled with fixative
i ure 3). Air expelled during the transfer of liquid into the
- lower or upper chamber zones is collected in a waste . . . .
I bag, representing a first level of containment. The inter (D) WW3—
~ connectivity of the PCM upper aerial chamber compart- m
I ments is also used to sumo” the gas “Change and car"" e
; bon dioxide management within the PCM during the IIIPW?
plant cultivation phase. The PCM may be operated in a ”y M W '
hermetically sealed or un-sealed mode. In an un-sealed
a mode the PCM air phase exchanges passively with air in
- the MOBIAS or ICM containment ve I, or in turn wi h . . .
3 the cabin air environment via air filters??? a sealed modet Figure 33 The plaht growth module conStsts Of an aerial
‘ zone which IS illuminated by a LED ltght array panel and a
t compartmentalized root zone, shown in (A). The PCM is
t i ”'9 ﬁtted With 6.10m"" diOXide, sensor’, and metering. 5y?“
"" . ‘ carbon dIOXIde from plant respiration partlcularly during
ﬁgt’ "" ,5»??? the non-illumination period, with the assimilation of car-
I 3f %%az _ i ”3%? bon dioxide through photosynthesis in the plant illumina-
_ ,. 1 ‘ . ‘m‘j‘é tion period. The cycling of each PCM in series to an eight
t ‘ it hour non-illumination period and the corresponding illu-
' mination of two PCMs at all times is used to maximize the
. use of carbon dioxide within the three PCM air loop and
5 Figure 2. The MOBIAS-PCM assembly consist of an in- reduce it to a minimum concentrations (typically around
t strument bay, plant cultivation module, and hydration 40 ppm). A carbon dioxide sensor and metering system
I and tissue processing ﬂuid bags_ iS used to establish the upper carbon dioxide level within
f the air loop environment to 700 ppm. When the sensor
t . measured carbon dioxide level decreases below the 400
i 3
i

"
"4","i
ppm. set point, a metered volume of carbon dioxide (300 the space plant cultivation facility for A. thaliana is com- ..
ppm) is injected into the air loop manifold from a bottled pact and represents an approach that might be used to .
reservoir, while an equal volume of air is expelled to en- help maintain active space plant research during a period
sure that the air loop pressure is equal to the external of constrained space ﬂight opportunity. Unlike the pre- '
pressure. The system is thus used to maintain a PCM air sent suit of advanced space plant growth facilities, which 3‘7
loop carbon dioxide concentration range of 400 -— 700 are capable of supporting a broad range of plant species
ppm. Management of the gas phase humidity and ethyl- and utilize an extensive environmental control system, T
ene level within in the PCM air phase is not regulated, the proposed facility is specifically configured to support
but addressed through the use of high humidity and the cultivation of small plant species such as Arabidopsis
ethylene tolerant A. thaliana mutants until initial evalua- with minimal environmental control and resources. The
tion studies are complete. The air manifold can accom- low resource cultivation requirements of Arabidopsis
modate a quantity of PurafilTM, which can provide a limited and broad tolerance range to many environmental fac-
capacity to absorb and avoid the accumulation of the tors, particularly with the use of mutants strains, make the
plant stress compound ethylene within the system. support of this species in the proposed growth facility

highly feasible. Although the compact design of the
The PCM may be illuminated with either a white or red, PCM is unable to accommodate typical flowering and
light emitting diode (LED) array. The LEDs’ are config- seed to seed studies in non-dwarf forms of A. thaliana,
ured in six circles with each circle composed of eight the system is capable of supporting an extensive range
LEDs which are positioned over each of the six culture of research on the vegetative phase of the species. The
chambers in a PCM. capacity of the MOBIAS system to support mechanized
fluid transfer procedures, coupled with the compact de-
sign of the PCM, allows the fully automated initiation and
__ termination of plant growth trials and alleviates the need
0;"" for crew intervention, which is presently unavailable in
I... ﬁt the current SW9 0* space 9'6"""" Wm *acWieS- Future 1
E e / «» work will be directed towards assembling and integrating ‘
i é;i.,i,i,[ff;iIifITfIiiIII:LilififgfjliiiIf?i""7iLIL;LjfljfiffiIL"";‘jffffifff:LEQfILijgéii Wt the various components 0f the pro posed plant growth
“22:? ream” facility and implementing both hardware and plant growth '
‘ :iiii:iii'i:t;ifiti'ffii'::i:;::;ig:iii:'iiiii:f::f:::::i“:‘i‘ii'f‘i’ii‘i’i‘“:' .""':::::::1:"""""". WWW“ Contact I
ﬂag Gerard Heyenga, NASA Ames Research Center, M/s
I;@ I&{é'éel Wm 239-23, Moffett Fie|d , C A 94035-1 000 , U S A ,
Air Manifold git. eyenganail.arc.nasa.g0v, (650) 604-1258 E
R E FE R E N c as: ;
5:52:25;zzzgzzzzsaszesz: M ete i‘i n :
System Simmons D., Benoit M., Freeman J.,Genova J., Hoehn l
A. (2002), “Designing Fluid Handling Systems for Space I
Figure 4. The interconnection of three PCM units sub- Life Science Experimentation” SAE paper 2002-01- ‘
jectedto a rotating illumination period is used To support 2281, 32nd International Conference on Environmental i
carbon dioxide management in PCMs through the com- Systems. 4 E
bined passive biological processes of plant respiration
and photosynthesis and an active mechanical sensor Hoehn, A., Freeman, “3., and Stodieck, L.S., (1999) E
g and 983 metering system. “Incubator Designs for Space Flight Application - Optimi- I
zation and Automation”, SAE paper 1999-01-2177, 29th :
C ON CLU SI 0N: International Conference on Enwronmental Systems.
_ _ _ . Heyenga A.G., Hoehn A., Stodieck L., Kliss M., (2000)
The rescheduling'ahd consolidation of launch and In— “The Design of a Mechanized Seed Sowing System for 1
flight resources limits the opportunity for large plant Space Flight App'ication”’ SAE paper 2000—01-2506, }
growth facilities to be accommodated on the International 30th International Conference on Environmental Sys- E
Space Station (ISS), and emphasizes the need for facili- terns.
ties and research studies which are compact and can op- ;
erated with minimal resources. The proposed design of

i

i

|

"
