"","x"
"1","REVIEW www.rsc.org/softmatter | Soft Matter
Complex plasma—the plasma state of soft matter
Manis Chaudhuri,“ Alexei V. Ivlev,“ Sergey A. Khrapak,” Hubertus M. Thomas“ and Gregor E. Morﬁll“
Received 13th August 2010, Accepted 25th October 2010
DOI: 10.1039Ic0sm00813c
Complex plasma is the plasma state of soft matter Which consists of weakly ionized gas (plasma) and
3 highly charged microparticles. The microparticles are large enough to be Visualized individually and
g their dynamics can be observed With great accuracy using simple Video microscopic techniques. These
E features allow us to perform experiments With high temporal and spatial resolutions. Furthermore,
g since the background gas is usually dilute, the particle dynamics of strongly coupled complex plasmas
§ are Virtually undamped, Which provides a direct analogy to regular liquids and solids in terms of the
g 3, atomistic dynamics. All these unique features allow complex plasma to be used as an ideal model system
% .25 (complementary to other model systems in soft matter physics such as colloids, granular medium, etc.)
i? 3 to investigate various phenomena (e.g, phase transitions, phase separation, self—organizations,
i g” rheology, linear and nonlinear waves, transport, etc.) at the most fundamental kinetic level.
5’ E 1 Introduction us a unique opportunity to use complex plasmas as model
g E; (a ,9 . . systems to explore fundamental physics beyond the limits of
E a The term 80ft matter describes a class Of matter that is hydrodynamics (continuous media) and study various generic
E 90 suﬁramoleicular, ex.?blt‘: mactroscolpic soﬁness, htas meltistable processes occurring in solids and liquids, in regimes ranging from
3 s a es an is sens1 we 0 eX erna con 1 ions a equi 1 rium. -
ES T‘s Typical energy scales involved are about room temperature and, :he onset Of cooperative phenomena t-O largezstrongly coupled
a Q . . . ystems at the most fundamental kinetic level.
to a to
'8 Q . . . . collmds—one of the most popular model systems in soft matter
23 8 matter prov1des. an richness of poss1b1e forms that these materials physics. Colloids are solutions or suspensions of mesoscopic
g 8 can attain. An 1noreas1ng trend for studying such systerns is the solid particles With a stable core and typical sizes ranging from
8 3 relationship of different fundamentai physical, .chemical and N1 nm to N1 “111, Which are embedded in a m olecular ﬂuid
of
. . . . . . . . o the presence of the Viscous solvent. The embedding host ﬂuid
nating, ,mterqlsml? 11nary research ﬁeld? This is illustrated thermalizes the system perfectly leading to Brownian motion of
schematically in Flg' 1' . . . the individual particles. Therefore, colloidal dispersions can be
. Comp 16X p lasmas 001181.“ Of weakly ionized gas (p lasma) and brought into equilibrium in a very controlled way. They are also
highly charged,. nncron Slzed particles.“ The name “00111ka ideal for investigating non-equilibrium phenomena due to their
plasma” was originally chosen as an analogy to complex ﬂuids susceptible nature to external perturbations Which makes them
deﬁning the class of soft matter systems existing in the liquid become out of equilibrium in a controlled way. Otherwise,
form. In analogy With the composition of soft matter systems, the colloidal dispersions and complex plasmas have similar
“molecular” components in complex plasmas (electrons and
ions) are gaseous, Whereas “supramolecular” component
(microparticles) can form solid, liquid or gaseous phases _
depending on the relative strengths of the interparticle interac- PhyS'ca' States Of 50ft (grammar) matter
tion.5 In the laboratory, the microparticles are easily observable
and the characteristic time scale (e.g., the inverse dust plasma
frequency) is much longer than in conventional electron-ion
plasma. Furthermore, the rate of momentum/energy exchange ‘
between microparticles can substantially exceed the damping rate AerOSOI C'OUdS
due to neutral gas friction (undamped particle dynamics)—thus ~ ,
providing an essentially single species system for kinetic studies. (Complex electrolytes) Colloidal Coulomb CFYSta‘S
Moreover, comparison in terms of similarity parameters such as ~
Reynolds, Rayleigh and Weber numbers for ﬂuids suggests that Complex ﬂuids Colloidal crystals
liquid complex plasmas behave like conventional liquids
(e. g., water), but can be observed at the atomistic level. This gives
Granular solids
“Max-Planck-Institut ﬁir extraterrestrische Physik, D-85741 Garching,
Germany. E—mail; chaudhuri@mpe. mpg. de; ivlev@mpe. mpg. de;
Skhrapak@mpe.mpg.de; thomas@mpe.mpg.de; gem@mpe.mpg.de Fig. 1 Hierarchy of soft matter states, including latest addition—
bJoint Institute for H igh T emperalures RAS, 125412 Moscow, Russia complex plasmas.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1287

"
"2","properties: fully resolved particle trajectories, both in 2D and 3D, Obviously, the highly charged particles strongly interact with
can be easily Visualized, the interactions are tunable, particles can each other electrically.3’l4’16 Below we will summarize the essen—
be manipulated individually. This implies that by combining tial properties of the electrical interactions between the particles.
research from both ﬁelds we are able to investigate a full range of
complex phenomena occurring in strongly coupled systems at the
most elementary individual particle level—a maj or breakthrough 2'2 Electrical interactions in isotropic plasmas
in 013531031 physics. Assuming for simplicity that two particles have equal charges
which are independent of their separation r, the energy of their
0 2 Complex plasmas as an ensemble of soft interactien iS
m o o 0
§ Interactlng partlcles U (r) : Q¢(r), (1)
a As in other interacting particle systems, the shape of the inter—
§ action potential plays a crucial role with respect to a wide range where €150” ) is the distribution 0f the electrical potential around
N a Of observable phenomena. In this section we present a brief the particle. Some deviation from this simpliﬁed picture will be
§ 2 overView of the interaction mechanisms operating between small discussed Iater th thtS paper. At the moment let US focus on the
E g particles immersed in a plasma environment. Since one of the effects Whleh determine the shape 0f $0”)-
< 3 most important interactions is the electrical repulsion between The distribution 0f the electrical potential around a small
3 g) highly charged particles, we begin this section with a short individual spherical particle 0f charge Q in isotropic plasmas is
g E description of particle Charging in plasmas. often described by the Debye—Hiickel (Yukawa) form
*-' B
5’ e . . ¢(r) = (Q/r>exp(—r/A>, (2)
g E 2.1 Partlcle charglng
c; g The dominant charging process in low-temperature laboratory whereA is the effective plasma screening length. The exponential
j g plasmas is the continuous absorption of electrons and ions on the screening comes fr0?1tlhe Ledistriibutionl Of plasma electrofnls and
T; ‘6; particle surface. The stationary particle Charge (and ﬂoating ions mt e Vlcmlty O t e C arge part1oe. Int e regimeo H.162”
CZ“ 45 potential) is determined from the condition that the collected screening the plasma screening length is equal to the linearized
3 § electron and ion ﬂuxes balance each other, JC 2 Ji 2 J0. Since the Debye radius A : AD: where AD : ADi/ﬂ /1 + (ADi/ADey with
E a electrons are much more mobile than the ions, the particle Charge 2 . . .
E f; is negative. This increases the ion ﬂux and decreases the electron ADKe) : V Ti(e)/47Te ”1(6) being the 10m (electron) Debye radius
E g ﬂux, making the ﬂuX balance possible. The particle surface and 111(6) the ion (electron) density. However, complex plasmas
Q i; potential gbs is proportional to the electron temperature T e, viz. are often characterized by strong ion—particle coupling: the
E gbs : —Z(Te/e), where z is the numerical coefﬁcient of the order electrostatic energy of ion—particle interaction can considerably
unity, and e is the elementary charge. The coefﬁcient 2 is not exceed the ion kinetic energy in the Vicinity of the particle. Even
ﬁxed, but in general depends on various plasma and particle in this case, Close to the particle (up to a distance of few screening
parameters (e.g., electron and ion velocity distribution functions, lengths from its surface), the Debye—Hiickel (DH) form works
electron—to—ion mass and temperature ratios, particle size and reasonably well.17 However, the effective screening length A can
shape, ratio of the particle size to the plasma screening length, deviate from the linearized Debye radius. The exact dependence
etc.) The effect of plasma collisionality has been recently of A on plasma and particle parameters is not known for the
demonstrated to cause the largest variations in 2 (see e.g. Ref. 10— general case and so far it has been determined using numerical
14). The level of plasma collisionality is typically measured in simulations for only a limited number of special cases.“’17’18 For
terms of the ratio between the ion mean free path with respect to a collisionless plasma with T 6 >> T i the expression proposed in
collisions with neutral particles, ii and the plasma Debye length Ref.14 is A:ADU + 0.105\/B + 0.0136], where 6 : |Q|e/(TiAD) is
AD (the mean free path of the electrons is usually more than one the so—called scattering parameter, which is a natural measure of
order of magnitude longer than that of the ions and therefore nonlinearity in ion—grain interaction.1“’19’20
plasma collisionality is mainly associated with the ion—neutral An important speciﬁc property of complex plasmas affecting
collisions). When ii >> AD the plasma is called collisionless, in the shape of ¢(r) is associated with the continuous absorption of
the opposite limit ii << AD the plasma is in the highly collisional plasma on the particles. In particular, in the absence of plasma
regime. Most of the experimental investigations of complex production and loss in the Vicinity of the particle, conservation of
plasmas are carried out in low—pressure gas discharges, where the plasma ﬂuX directed to the particle completely determines the far
weakly collisional plasma regime is usually realized, ii 2 AD. asymptote of the potential. As a result, at large distances the
Typical values of the normalized ﬂoating potentials reported in potential is not screened exponentially but eXhibits a power law
different experiments lie in the range 0.5 S 2 S 1.5 (see 6. g. ﬁgure decay. In collisionless plasmas the far asymptote scales as21’22 ¢(r)
8 in Ref. 15). Assuming that z = 1 and using the vacuum value 0c r‘z. In the opposite limit of strongly collisional plasma the
for the particle capacitance (which is a good approximation for potential has a Coulomb—like asymptote,”24 ¢(r) 0c r‘l.
sufﬁciently small particles), Q : gbsa, we get Q = —a(Te/e), where To understand why the potential is not screened exponentially
a and Q are the particle radius and Charge, respectively. The and has different asymptotes in collisionless and collisionallimits
Charge is directly proportional to the particle radius and electron the following approximate consideration can be useful. The
temperature and can in principle be varied over a wide range. For deviation of ion and electron densities from the equilibrium
the typical values a = 1 am and T e = 1 eV we get Q = —103e. (Boltzmann) values are associated with their continuous
1288 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
"3","absorption on the particle surface and the corresponding ﬂuxes , ,
. . . x _ Kinetic Model
from the surrounding plasma. These deV1at10ns can be roughly 0 \ \ _,___,_ DH
estimated as 6ni,e(r)/ni,e(r) = —J0/Ji,e(r), where Ji,e(r) is the ﬂuxes IO .- \~\\ \ x \ _ _ _ _ SC limit
of ions and electrons entering the spherical surface of radius r —1 ' ‘\~\ ‘ x CL limit
from the outside. For r >> a we have Je(r) >> Ji(r) due to much 10 \\~ \ ‘ \
higher mobility of the electrons and, therefore, the electron w \‘\‘ \ \ \
density distribution is close to the equilibrium one, ne(r) = 101 \‘ ‘ x \
nOeXp[e¢(r)/Te], where no is the unperturbed plasma density. q, ‘ \
Sufﬁciently far from the particle the plasma is quasineutral, b 10—3 A 7 k 1%)}
g which requires ni(r) = nOeXp[—e¢(r)/ T i] + 6ni(r) = ne(r). Since at ‘8' _ m ‘\\ ..
g large distances the potential becomes sufﬁciently small we can ' 104 _ '0: \\ ""\l.
a expand exponential terms in power series. Keeping only the ﬁrst S _ Km‘ ‘- . ‘,_
§ two terms we immediately get 10"" T3101 ‘-\.
a ;
g E ¢(r) = _(Ti/e)[J0/Ji(r)]a (3) 104‘s """" \ ‘.\-..._.. k,)l,.=3
: ‘ﬁ 10"" '
3% E where we assume T 6 >> T i. The last step in this consideration is 10—7 . 10"" ‘_:k r m] \-\
a g0 to recognize that the inﬂux Ji(r) depends on the ion collisionality r- . 1 ' "" , , '
8 3 rate. For weakly perturbed collisionless Maxwellian ions the ﬂux 10"" 10” 10'
*2 E into the spherical surface of radius r is Ji(r) = Mrznovn, where x = kDr
35: g vTi = i/Ti /mi is the ion thermal velocity. In the highly collisional . _ _ _ _ _ _
g g limit the i on ﬂux is given by the Smoluchowski expression, Fig}. Distribution of the normalized electric potenttialtaround a small
g 8 Ji(r) : 4Tcm0Di, where Di 2 vT/i is the ion diffusion coefﬁcient. ??EVIdual C?argedf pﬁmhle m in .180?) p1? Zeaklihlomzii plasma for
e 3’ Substituting these expressions into eqn (3) we immediately get 1 erent va ues 9 t 6. Ion CO 1s10na1ty m ex' 6 SO 1 curves are
:C a . . . . calculated numerically in Ref. 25. The dashed and dotted curves corre-
g E asymptotic behaV10r Of the petential discussed above. spend to the analytic approximation in the strongly collisional or
Z a Recently, a Simple linear klhetle model has been proposed to eollisionless, respecitvely, limit. The dash—dotted curve shows the Debye—
E g calculate 6150”) taking into account the combined effect 0f iOH Hiickel potential with the surface potential calculated from the (colli-
E a absorption 0n the particle and ion—neutral collisions.”26 Using sionless) OML model. The inset shows a comparison between numerical
Li 2 this model the electric potential distribution can be calculated in calculation (solid lines with symbols) and analytical approximation of
g 1‘: the entire range of plasma collisionality. For distances exceeding eqn (4)- Difference in the IVIahleS 0f the surfeee potential iS related to the
Q g the plasma screening length the potential can be written as effect of 10n—neutral COlllSlOIlS 0n the particle charging. Adapted With
3% permission from Khrapak 61 611.25
m
¢(r) = (Q/r)eXp(—r/AD) — eQ/(e/r) — @(eAD/rz). (4)
as well as the effective charges (Q+ and Q_) depend on plasma
The coefﬁcients M and 93 estimated in Ref. 25 are M = (JOAD/ production strength and on the ion ﬂux collected by the particle.
VZ)(AD//i) and 9 = 0-6(JOAD/ V11)- Thus, the exact shape Of the Typically, k+ is determined by the classicalmechanism of Debye—
electrical potential distribution can depend on various plasma Hiickel screening and therefore, k+ is of the order of the inverse
parameters. An exemplary calculation of ¢(r) for different values plasma Debye screening length, which is normally smaller than
0f the 10h collisionality index (kD/ i E Zi/AD) iS shown in Fig. 2- the mean interparticle distance A. The long-range asymptote of
The effect of electron and ion production and loss in the the potential is determined by the smaller screening constant k_
plasma surrounding particles can also affect the electrical with the effective charge Q_ and is controlled completely by the
potential distribution. For an individual particle this effect was balance between the plasma production and loss. Therefore, k_
studied in Ref. 27 and 28 using the hydrodynamic approach for can vary over a fairly broad range and under typical conditions
the case of highly collisional plasmas. Electron impact ionization [Cl 2 A, The role of two—scale interactions has been studied in
was considered as the main mechanism of plasma production. order to explain the kinetics of ﬂuid de-mixing in complex
Plasma 1088 was either due to electron—ion volume r ecombina- plasmas in Ref. 32. In the special case when plasma losses are due
tiOh27’28 (WhiCh iS relevant t0 high pressure plasmas), due t0 to ambipolar diffusion only, we have k_ = 0, i.e., the long-range
ambipolar diffusion towards the discharge chamber walls and potential is not screened, but has a Coulomb-like (ocr—l) long-
electrodes28 (which occurs in low and moderate-pressure gas range asymptote.”
discharges), their combination,29 or collective plasma losses on
the particles themselves (when there are many particles).3031 In 2.3 Electrical interactions in anisotropic plasmas
this case the functional form of the electrical potential is of
double-Yukawa type and can be written as Electric ﬁelds are often present in plasmas (e.g., in rf sheaths,
positive column of do discharge, dc discharge striations, ambi-
gb : (Q+/r)exp(—rk+) + (Q_/r)exp(—rk_), (5) polar electric ﬁeld in plasma bulk, etc). This induces an ion drift
and, hence, creates a perturbed region of plasma density down-
139-» it is described by the SUPCYPOSitiOH 0f the tWO exponentially stream from the particle—the so—called “plasma wake” as shown
screened terms With different anCI‘SC screening lengths k... (ShOI‘t- in Fig. 3. One can apply the linear dielectric response formalism
range, SR) and k— (long-range, LR)- BOth these screening lengths to calculate the potential distribution in the wake. This approach
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1289

"
"4","is applicable provided ions are weakly coupled to the particle (lie. interaction of the neighbouring particle with the wake of the test
the region of nonlinear ion—particle electric interaction is small particle does not affect the test particle, as was clearly shown in
compared to the plasma screening length). Note that higher ion a previous experiment.46 In other words the wake—induced
drift velocities imply better applicability of the linear theory. The interactions are nonreciprocal. This can lead to non—Hamiltonian
electrostatic potential created by a point—like charge at rest is dynamics of particle systems.
deﬁned in this approximation as Having summarized the main qualitative properties of wake—
Q eik” d k induced interactions in complex plasmas we should mention that
¢(r) : Z—ﬂJW’ (6) the exact shape of the wake potential is sensitive to numerous
’ factors, like e.g. ion—neutral collisions,47 ion ﬂow velocity,”49
5 where g(w,k) is the plasma dielectric function. Here k is the electron—to—ion temperature ratio which governs Landau damp—
§ wavevector and w is the frequency. Using a certain model for the ingf‘9 plasma absorption 0n the particles,” etc.
a dielectric function, one can calculate the anisotropic potential
8 distribution using an analytical approach.33‘37 The potential . .
N 3 proﬁle can be also obtained from numerical simulations.38‘43 2'4 Tunable interactions
§ § Physically, the generation Of plasma. wakes th anisotropic The wake effect has been proposed to be used to design binary
TE, 5 dusty plasmas 1's Slmher t0 the generation ef electromagnetic interactions in complex plasmas by applying electric ﬁelds of
g E) waves by a particle Whleh .15 placed 1h a mov1ng medium,“ and various polarizations.48 The idea is to apply an electric ﬁeld
2 E the analogy V‘hth the Vav1lov—Cherenleov. effect can be useful. oscillating with a frequency which is (i) much higher than that
g g The potential is no longer monotonic Within a certain solid angle characterizing the particle dynamics and (ii) much slower than
g E downstream from the . particle, but has .a well pronounced the ion plasma frequency and the ion—neutral collision
8 i max1mum (see example th Flg- 3)- Th1s max1municorresponds to frequency. In this case the particles do not react to the ﬁeld,
“g E the appearance Of a region Of enhanced 10h dens1ty downstream whereas ions react instantaneously and the resulting interaction
3 5 from the particle, the effect usually referred to as ion focusing. between the particles is determined by the time—averaged distri—
i E The emergence Of a potential maximum affects the neighboring bution of the electric potential in the screening Clouds (see sketch
7% E particles. In particular, the electric ﬁeld of the wake attracts the in Fig. 4). Here the most interesting case is the case of spherical
E» g particles located downstream from the test one. (The interaction polarization where the vector of the electric ﬁeld rotates in such
g 3 1h the transverse direction remains repulsive). Such behaV1or ts a way that its directions are isotropically distributed in 3D space
ﬁg 8 usnally observed in ground—based experiments—particles leV1— but its absolute value remains constant.
% 5 tating 1n e.g., (pre)sheaths of rf discharges form stable vertical This fundamental property can be used to engineer “electro-
E '8 ccSthth”-45 The remarkable feature Of the wakes 15 that the rheological plasmas” by tuning the interparticle interaction to
Q % practically any shape. In particular, the potential can be made
5 attractive at long distances and changed from isotropic to
5 ‘IIP' anisotropic. So far, colloidal suspensions have been the major
V focus for studies of electrorheological (ER) ﬂuids, providing
’ a wealth of information.”54 There, for sufﬁciently large applied
4 ﬁelds, particles arrange themselves into strongly coupled chains
(“strings”, or even “sheets”) along the ﬁeld.55 This naturally
I changes the rheology—e.g., at low shear stresses ER ﬂuids can
2 A behave like elastic solids, whilst at stresses greater than a certain
ﬂ yield stress they are Viscous liquids again. The discovery that
‘3 0 @ 3:, g ‘ complex plasmas also have electrorheological properties adds
4 V ‘ a) b)ionldrifl C)
2h .i ¢L ¢
, A f 0
-2 O 2 4 5 8 1 0 1 2
z/ho. : 3
Fig. 3 An example of plasma wake. The complex structure of the wake Fig. 4 Electro-rheological plasma. (a) The polarizable ion cloud around
potential ¢(r) (plasma ﬂows to the right). Calculations are for collision- a dust particle is spherically symmetric in absence of an external electric
less ions with a shifted Maxwellian distribution and for Boltzmann ﬁeld. (b) In the presence of a dc electric ﬁeld the center of the ion cloud is
electrons. The (negatively charged) grains are at the center of the left- shifted downwards from the dust particle (wake effect) (c) A reciprocal
most node, solid and dashed curves indicate contour lines for negative electric ﬁeld responsible for electro-rheological effect is created using an
and positive potentials. Distances are in units of Ape. Adapted with uniaxial ac electric ﬁeld with a deﬁnite frequency. Adapted with
permission from Lampe et a1. 39 permission from IVleV 61 611.51
1290 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
"5","a new dimension to such research—in terms of time/space scales force is always attractive and eXhibits 0c r—1 scaling with distance.
and for studying new phenomena.51 The effective interaction in An approximate expression for the ion shadowing potential,
ER complex plasmas consists of two principal contributions:51 taking into account the effect of ion—neutral collisions in the
the short range “core” term represents the spherically—symmetric weakly collisional plasma regime, has been derived in Ref. 66.
Debye—Hiickel (Yukawa) part, whereas the second term is due to Since at large distances both electric and ion shadow interac—
the interaction between the charge of one particle and the tion potentials have the same ocr‘1 asymptotes, depending on
quadrupole part of the wake produced by another particle. The their relative magnitudes, the total long—range interaction can be
charge—quadrupole interaction is identical to the interaction either repulsive or attractive. An approximate condition for
between two equal and parallel dipoles. This implies that the attraction derived in Ref. 66 is ii 2 42D, lie. rather low plasma
a interactions in ER plasmas are equivalent to dipolar interactions collisionality is required in order to make ion shadowing
g in conventional ER ﬂuids. attraction operational in complex plasmas.
a A mechanism of interaction similar to ion shadowing can be
§ 2.5 Complex plasmas: novel classes of non-Hamiltonian assoc1ated With the neutral component, prov1ded the particle
% surface temperature is different from the temperature of the
(\l o systems . . . .
§ ; surrounding neutral gas.67 If the particle surface is hotter, there1s
E :- One of the remarkable features distinguishing complex (dusty) a net momentum ﬂux from the particle into the plasma which
i? E plasmas from usual plasmas is that charges on the grains are not results in the repulsion between a pair of particles. If the particle
a g“ constant, but ﬂuctuate in time around some equilibrium value surface is colder, the momentum ﬂux from neutral gas to the
E E which, in turn, is some function of spatial coordinates. Complex particle generates attraction between the particles. The “neutral
g g plasmas are a novel type of non—Hamiltonian systems where the shadowing” interaction potential also decays as ocr‘1 and is
(5)) g energy of the particle ensemble is not conserved due to charge proportional to the temperature difference between the particle
LE 3% variations. This is the generic feature of such systems—the surface and the neutral gas.67 Experiments and theoretical esti—
g g energy varies not only in the presence of external electric ﬁelds, mations demonstrated that in low pressure gas discharges the
i a but also due to mutual particle collisions. Non—Hamiltonian particle surface temperature is somewhat hotter than the neutral
E, ‘0; systems cannot be described in terms of thermodynamic poten— gas temperature.“70 Recent estimation shows that under typical
CZ“ g tials. An appropriate way to investigate their evolution is to discharge conditions the magnitude of neutral shadowing is
3 § employ the kinetic approach. The most general and simple way usually weaker compared to ion shadowing and electric inter—
E a to understand generic features of the ensembles with variable actions.70
g E charges is to study the case when no external forces are present
3 F5 and the energy of particles changes solely due to mutual colli— -
8 9;; sions. Recently, the two cases were studied256‘58 inhomogeneous 3 Phase diagram
E charge—Q depends on the particle coordinate but does not Exploring phase behaVior of different substances is an
change in time, and ﬂuctuating charge—Q randomly varies in outstanding problem in material science, with applications to
time around the equilibrium value which is constant in space. For both basic and applied research. The usual procedure of pre—
both cases the Fokker—Planck approach was employed to derive dicting the phase diagram of a given substance is based on
the collision integral which describes the momentum and energy extensive numerical simulations using a model pair potential
transfer in mutual particle collisions as well as in the collisions which approximates actual interactions in this substance. In this
with neutrals. It was shown that the mean particle energy eXhibits way, the thermodynamically stable phases for simple pair
the explosion—like growth when the neutral friction is below potentials, including hard sphere, Lennard—Jones, Yukawa,
a certain threshold. inverse power, generalized exponential, and other potentials were
One more example of non—Hamiltonian dynamics is associated identiﬁed.71‘79 These results are relevant to a wide range of
with the presence of ion wakes. As was pointed out above, the physical systems, from simple atomic gases, ﬂuids and solids to
interaction between two particles in this case is nonreciprocal. trapped non—neutral plasmas80 and new materials such as
This is the reason why the energy of such particle ensembles is fullerenes and soft matter (colloidal suspensions, polymers,
not conserved, which can result in, for e. g, the melting of plasma surfactants, etc. ).73
crystals (see Ref. 59—62 for details). Complex plasma is an example of the system exhibiting rich
variety of phase transitions. Amongst these the freezing (ﬂuid—
2.6 Other mechanisms of interparticle interactions solid) phase transition is of particular interest for experimental
stud1es.3""5’81 The main mechanism respons1ble for the ﬂuid—solid
Besides electrical effects, there eXist other mechanisms that can phase change in complex plasmas is the electrical repulsion
contribute to interparticle interactions in complex plasmas. between highly charged macroscopic particles. As discussed
These are associated with the speciﬁc property of complex above, the potential of electrical interaction can have a rather
plasmas—their thermodynamic openness caused by the contin— complicated shape [see e. g. Eqn (4)] and depends on a number of
uous exchange of matter and energy between the particles and plasma and particle parameters. This implies that even modern
surrounding plasma. For instance, constant plasma absorption computational methods are not very feasible in obtaining the
on the particle surfaces gives rise to a so—called “ion shadowing” complete phase portrait of complex plasmas, since in general
interaction,39’63‘65 which is basically the ion drag force that one multi—dimensional parameter space has to be scanned.
particle experiences as a consequence of the ion ﬂux directed to There are, however, some approximations which can be
another neighboring particle and vice versa. The ion shadowing employed to estimate the freezing line in complex plasmas and
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1291

"
"6","other related systems, with very little computational cost. The to the screening length. For the IPL potentials F = (8/T)(a/A)”
“universal freezing curve” proposed in Ref. 88 can be of partic- and y = n.
ular use for the potentials consisting of a sum of Yukawa and Fig. 6 demonstrates the dependence of F on y at freezing
inverse powerlaw (IPL) terms (e.g. complex plasmas). The idea is obtained numerically for Yukawa and IPL potentials.78’82‘87
to ﬁnd (if possible) a convincing scaling, which locates the Amazingly, all the data points fall on a single curve—the
freezing points for Yukawa and IPL potentials on a single curve. “universal freezing curve”. A ﬁt for this “universal freezing
Such a scaling indeed exists as we brieﬂy discuss below. curve” proposed in Ref. 88 can be used for predicting phase
Let us consider two types of diverging repulsive potentials. The diagrams of various relevant systems. Here we consider a special
ﬁrst one is the Debye—Huckel (Yukawa) potential, which can be case of complex plasmas, where the interparticle potential can be
5 written in the form U(r) = (UO/r)exp(—r/2), where U0 is approximated by
g a parameter (U0 2 Q2 in complex plasmas). The second is the IPL
a potential U(r) = 8(a/r)”, where e and a are energy and length U(’”) = (Uo/V)[(1 — “)6XP(—VM) + 04] (7)
§ scales and n is the index. Phase diagrams of these systems have .
N a been extensively studied.78’82‘87 For both potentials three phases that is the sum of screened (Yukawa) and unscreened (Couloinb)
S 2 can exist, one ﬂuid and two solid. The solid phases form either terms. . The chosen form Of the potential, eqn (7)= prov1des
% :- a body-centered cubic (boo) lattice, favorable for sufﬁciently soft a continuous path from the pure Yukawa (0‘ Z 0) to the pure
3 E interactions, or a face-centered cubic (foo) lattice favorable for Coulomb interaction (0‘ Z 1) The parameter 0‘ regulates the
a %” hard interactions. Since we are mostly interested in the ﬁuid-solid relative importance Of the unscreened Coulomb part. Moreover,
E E transition here, the conventional phase diagrams of Yukawa and eqn (7) reproduces exactly the structure Of the potential Of elec-
§ § IPL systems in Fig. 5 show only the numerical data corre- tricalinteraction between two smallparticles1n highly cggllghsional
(5)) g sponding to freezing. Taking into account the different choices of plasmas, calculated “Slhg the hydrodynamic approach. ’
«E g parameters traditionally used to plot the phase diagrams of these The family of freezmg curves for the potential, eqn (7.):
cg 8 systems, no similarities can be seen directly from Fig. 5. calculated for different values of the parameter oz is shown in
j g A pair of universal parameters identiﬁed in Ref. 88 to char- Flg- 7- AS could .be expected, the freezing curves are located
E, ‘0; acterize freezing for Yukawa and IPL potential is: (i) the actual between the freezmg curves corresponding to the two hhhtlhg
g :5 coupling strength, r = U(A)/T, which is the ratio ofthe potential cases of YPkawa Systems (9 =9» lower CW?) and OCP (9 f 1»
E“ h energy of interaction between neighboring particles to their upper horizontal line). Tt 1s eVident from .Fig. 7 that deV1ations
E a kinetic energy, measured in units of the system temperature T from the Yukawa freezmg curve at sufﬁc1ently hlgh Ktare quite
E 2 (here A is the mean interparticle distance related to the particle substantial even for very Sh‘ah values Of 0"" Thls IS obV1ously the
E g number density ,0 via ,0 A3 : 1); and (ii) the steepness of the result. of the fastexponential decay of the Yukawa potential. In
G 4; interaction potential at the mean interparticle distance deﬁned as the highly colhs1onal plasma regime, the parameter 0‘ tends to
ES 1’ = ldln U(r)/d1nr|r = A- In terms of the conventional notation we unity24’89’90 and the freezing curve is quite close to that of the
me have P = (UO/ADeXp(—K) and y = 1 + K for the Yukawa OCP system.
potential, where K 2 NA is the ratio of the interparticle distance There also exists a phenomenological criterion Of freezing
based on the value of the properly normalized second derivative
of the interparticle potential evaluated at the mean interparticle
ocp O Stringfeﬂoweta'-(1990) 10.0 A Hooveretal.(1971)
102 I Meijerand Frenkelt(1991) X Agrawatand Kofke(1995)
: ifggizsf’e‘fgﬁg'fgggfgm 7-5 * Prestipino et al. (2005) 100 O Halhaguchi et a1. (1997)
S ' I Meuer and Frenkel (1991)
9K ' Stevens and Robbins 1993
I— 80"""" 55-0 8°""d I Hooveret al. (1971) ( )
~ -, ""‘3 R X Agraval and Kotke (1995)
2.5 _ . >\ * Prestipino et al. (2005)
O , s10 . . O Stnngfcllow etal. (1990)
10 0 5 10 0'000 0.1 0.2 0.3 b t
K l/n II ‘
Fig. 5 Conventional phase diagrams for the repulsive Yukawa (left Li
panel) and IPL (right panel) potentials. For the Yukawa potential the '
conventional plane is (K, P), where K : AM is the ratio of the interparticle 1 ~
distance to the screening length and F : (UOIA Dexp(—K) is the coupling
parameter. Here, solid circles, squares, and triangles correspond to the
numerical data of Ref. 78, 82, and 83, respectively; solid diamond marked 0 5 10 ’y 1 5 20
by the arrow is the OCP freezing point from Ref. 84. For the IPL
potentials the conventional plane is (1/71, pa3[e/T]3/”), where p : A‘3 is the Fig. 6 The “universal freezing curve” in the (7, F) plane,88 where 7 is the
particle density. Triangles, crosses and stars correspond to numerical potential steepness and F is the actual coupling strength (for deﬁnitions
data from Ref. 85, 86 and 87, respectively. The solid curves on both see text). Symbols denote available numerical data for the Yukawa and
ﬁgures show the “universal freezing curve” from Fig. 6. Adapted with IPL potentials. Solid curve is the ﬁt proposed in Ref. 88. Notation is the
permission from Khrapak et a1. 88 same as in Fig. 5. Adapted with permission from Khrapak et a1. 88
1292 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
"7","structural complexity of the surface down to atomic dimensions
1 02 __(_)CP ree21ng me (a Z l_) and its change with time. Understanding all of these features is
‘ ~ - _ - - - - ' ' ‘ ' . / ' ’ ' . . ' ' ° , ’ not only a matter of fundamental science—it is also exceptionally
/ . . . . . .
‘ , / ' . / / important for materials des1gn. In particular, it has become clear
\- _. / ' , ' / that nanoscale structures and properties can have a profound
, ' / effect on the optical, electrical and mechanical properties of the
x ‘ ~ . , ' / meso- or macroscopic material.
L 101 i ' ‘ / It is clear that fully resolved kinetic measurements of the
_3\ ‘ / crystallization process and its dynamics studied with complex
a ‘ ' a = 10 2 — plasmas will complement considerably our understanding of the
g - - - - (1 =10' elementary processes. This would open up the possibility to
a — - — a = 10'1 directly compare (and rescale) measurements made at the inter-
8 - - - - - a = 0,5 Yukawa freezing curve esting dynamical frequencies using plasma crystals and colloidal
% 0 ((1 = 0) systems. We illustrate this with characteristic exam les from
N o 10 . . . p
§ 2 0 5 10 complex plasmas and collmds: Fig. 8a shows a slice of a 3D
E E K plasma crystal where colors indicate different lattice structures
CL ,5 . . .
g :0 Fig. 7 Example of freezing curves calculated in Ref. 88 for the model found locally, in a s1ngle cell around each p article. we see the
2 E potential of eqn (7). The lower curve corresponds to the pure Yukawa coeX1stence Of the (presumably) ground state (foe) .and a meta-
g Q potential (oz : 0), While the upper horizontal line corresponds to the OCP stable state (hep), Whleh seems to mark the domain borders.”
§ § limit (oz : 1). In between, the dashed, dotted, dash—dotted, and short SUCh borders are 3150 soon 1n crystalline colloids (Fig. 8b)
(5)) $1 dashed curves correspond to at : 10—3, 10—2, 10—1, and 0.5 respectively. between domains of the same structure but different lattice
E f? Adapted With permission from Khrapak et a1. 88 orientation.
g g Regarding the crystallization kinetics, one can observe both
.3: 2 . . . . cc ' 99 - a . .
< o distance. It is motivated by the Lindemann type argumentss‘l’92 unifo”rm (homogeneous) nucleation and erystallization
7:, ﬂ fronts (sort of heterogeneous nucleation), and Wthh pathway is
> c) and works reasonably well for Yukawa, IPL, and Lennard—Jones . . . .
CZ“ 43 . 93 . . . realized in the experiment depends heaV1ly on the boundary
g potentials. Although the discussed phenomenological freezmg , , , , ,
3 o . conditions: in the bulk region, where boundaries play no role, the
,5 5 rules are not universal and cannot replace the proper thermo- , , ,
a) . . . . . system usually develops towards the uniform nucleation. In this
3 3 dynamic prescription of the phase portraits of different systems, , , ,
2 a . . . . . case, one normally observes coex1stence of mesoscopic crystalline
q 0 they can be rather useful in approx1mately predicting, With very , , , , , ,
3 U . . . . . domains of different structure and orientation (Similar to nano-
o (3 little effort, the freezmg trans1tions for certain substances . 100 101 . .
Q .m . . . . . structured regular solids, ’ typical examples of such domains
: (including complex plasmas) over a Wide range of conditions. , , , ,
g . . . . in complex plasmas and collmds are shown in Fig. 8). However,
m To conclude this section let us be reminded that bes1des elec- . . . .
. . . . . closer to the boundaries the crystallization often develops in the
trical effects, there eX1st other mechanisms of interparticle . . . .
. . . . . form of a front propagating from boundaries inwards. Th1s
interactions in complex plasmas. These are assomated With the . .11 t t d . F' 9
thermodynamic openness of complex plasmas. Two examples p rocess 1? 1.118 ra e 1n .1g. ' . . .
. . ﬂ. . ,, a . ,, The distinct peculiarity of the crystallization fronts is the
cons1dered earlier are ion shadow1ng and neutral shadowmg . . .
. . . . . . . . emergence of mesophases or phaselets—a distribution of small
interactions. In particular, the ion shadow1ng interaction is a ,, , a , ,, , ,
. . . . . . droplets in the crystal phase and small crystallites 1n the ﬂuid
always attractive and can, in pr1n01ple, dominate over electrical 102 . .
. . . . . . . phase, that are seen in Fig. 9b. The development of the
repuls1on at long interparticle separations. The poss1b111ty of
long-range attraction between the particles stimulated ongoing
discussions about the existence of a liquid—vapor phase transi- , , ’ .. . -, J. .. . ' p H O ,
. . . . . . . 2-: ’niﬁ..-°:3-:’.°i’.°-'.° 'u-Zut’ 5'2!» - e ‘
tion and liquid—Vapor critical p01nt in complex plasnias.66’94"")’S £???kﬁiiiiiiiﬁﬁ3553:4325; , . v
. . . . . . .3"" t 30.3. ‘ ‘O.':..'o-.o :‘ I
This would be a very eX01t1ng opportunity to investigate related °""11,2:233§:§§‘*q$.~325p:§3 .
' - 0.""...‘6. ""Q:O_:- .qidzq. o.:.o-:'o-:'.: .O’aga
phenomena at the most fundamental kinetic level, but so far no ‘ 5.53%,ggzgﬁﬁggﬁﬁgdszgggigﬁz
. . , , , :31 013-2: o'gq-a {:29 .'- ""g
reliable experimental eVidence on the occurrence of liquid—Vapor .a:lgtigtfﬁgag.z-tjf}ﬁﬁ§3.;p§3-3;??-
. . . ’39.?m' i310}. ' 3*.»3’ihﬁlh 4-, ,
phase trans1tion in complex plasmas has been reported. '?:P-tﬁizﬁzﬁzbg’3*5a:::_:r;b-;£ii»‘
5:43.2931235;9:3:9.gephpmﬁ’
'gaziaiitzi‘i‘gizéti:233.555ilteﬁéz.’ ' -
. . . . . . ‘ 6%:20'::;.14:.:’.:‘;99,':D_¢'d‘:::::‘::::.00'. __ (I t ,
4 Klnetlc studles of phase trans1t10ns Wlth strongly 111:5:‘.,¢.;,3,:},'.ﬁ:;j§a;a3§5 a) E . . _ ' b)
coupled complex plasmas ‘ ‘ ’ ' ' ‘ ' ‘""'
. . . . Fig. 8 Domain structure of 3D crystals. (a) Structure of a plasma crystal
4'1 Phase tranSItlons 1n SOhdS With 3.38 um diameter particles. Three consecutive lattice planes are
Although it is relatively straightforward to measure the atomic Shir]; €13Chlpargde mdthe mlddledpltanihls :01?r:,0dedﬁn ascordanfe
structure of (steady state) 3D crystals, the detailed dynamics of W1 6 9% 9r er (re .CorreSpon S O . 6 .00 a Ice CC an green 0
t l rowth (includin the evolution of self—or anization hep), partlcles in two adjacent planes are indicated by crosses and stars.
crys a g . g . . . g ’ Adapted With permission from Zuzic et al.98 (b) Domain interface in
structure formation, and .the assomated kinetic and thermody- a crystalline colloid. Near such interfaces (grain boundaries) the crystal is
namlc development) remains one Of the most important topics 0f premelted—the particles move rapidly and show liquid-like diffusion (red
solid state phys1cs.96’97 Very little is known, for instance, about represents the most movements and Violet is for the rest). Adapted with
the evolutionary paths of crystal structure development, and the permission from A. Alsayed and A. Yodh.99
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1293

"
"8","7 3 ~ .‘ -‘. ' . "" _ y ' liqui d exchange energy and matter..Aren1arkable property of nonlinear
1» , , . front . open systems 1s self—organization103,104—a spontaneous emer-
f ' ' i CWStamte gence of stable spatial (or temporal) structures, which are often
‘ 1’ j ’ ‘ referred to as “dissipative structures”, since dissipation plays
i , ‘ 7, . a constructive role in their formation. Dissipative structures are
.1 ' droplet . . . . . . .
. . the manifestation of non-equ111br1u1n phase trans1tions. In order
_ ‘ i ‘ ‘7 7‘ ' . 3 for such transitions to occur, three basic requirements have to be
'3 . ‘ . .a) or stal b) satisﬁed: (i) dissipation is necessary, to balance the external inﬂux
0 Fig. 9 Crystallization front in a 3D complex plasma.102 (a) Superposi- Of energy, (11) the structures may” emerge only 1n systems
«3 . . . . . . described by nonlinear equations, (111) there must be a relevant
a tlon of 10 consecutlve V1deo frames (about 0.7 s), partlcle posmons are , , ,
8 color-coded from green to red, i. e., “caged” particles appear redder and control p arameter Wthh ensures breaking Of symmetry (1)12""
53 “ﬂuid” particles are multicolored. (b) The local order for (a), where red transition) above a certain threshold.
8 implies high crystalline order, black denotes the ﬂuid phase, and yellow A remarkable example Of a nonequilibrium phase transition is
N g indicates transitional regions. Along with the crystallization front, the formation Of lanes—a phenomenon occurring in nature When
§ g droplets and crystallites are seen that may grow and then dissolve again. two species of particles are driven against each other. When the
E :- Particles are Of 1.28 um diameter. Adapted With permission from Zuzic driving forces are strong enough, like_driven particles form
55‘ E 6‘ 611-102 “stream lines” and move collectively in lanes. Typically, the lanes
i g” exhibit a considerable anisotropic structural order accompanied
3 g by an enhancement of their (unidirectional) mobility. The
g g crystallites can presumably be explained in terms of the ther- phenomenon is most commonly known from pedestrian
(33) g modynamics: in agreement with the classical picture of the dynamics in highly populated pedestrian zones,105 but also occurs
g g nucleation and growth, if the seed crystallite is large enough, the in different systems of driven particles, such as colloidal disper-
‘g g bulk contribution overcomes the surface part and it can grow sions,1°6’1°7lattice gases108 and molecular ions.109 In other words,
i 3 further. As for the droplets, the mechanism responsible for their this is a ubiquitous generic process of considerable interest in
E, ‘0; formation should be quite different, because thermodynamically, different branches of physics.
‘2“ a both the bulk and the surface contributions cause the free energy Fig. 10 shows an experiment on lane formation performed
3 g to increase. It is possible that after the initial solidiﬁcation, with particles of two different sizes.“°’111 The net force acting on
E a a gradual relaxation from a metastable to a ground state (for the particles in a discharge plasma (a combination of the electric
E 2’ example, from hcp to bcc or fcc structure, as one can see in and ion drag forces) depends on their sizes and plays the role of
E g Fig. 8a) occurs downstream from the crystallization front. This is an effective graVity pointed to the right (the force is relatively
Q @ naturally accompanied by a release of latent heat, so that the strong at the left edge and almost vanishing at the right edge of
E droplets could be a local manifestation of this relaxation. the ﬁgure). Initially, the large particles form a “background”
Another feature, which is peculiar to both homogeneous and ﬂuid in hydrostatic equilibrium. When a small fraction of indi-
heterogeneous nucleation, is the interfacial melting—a narrow Vidual small particles entered the system from the left, their
(few lattice distance extent) premelted region in the crystalline sedimentation towards the right edge of the ﬁgure is accompa-
regime where particles exhibit enhanced mobility.102 Regular nied by a remarkable self—organization sequence: ﬁrst, the
solids usually reveal domains of locally ordered regimes (grains), particles form strings ﬂowing along the force ﬁeld; then, as the
which are separated by domain (grain) boundaries.101 Thermo- ﬁeld decreases, strings organize themselves into larger meso-
dynarnically, these grain boundaries are different (both in energy scopic streams. At a later stage, when the ﬁeld almost vanishes,
and entropy) from the homogeneous crystal regimes within. streams merge to form a spheroidal droplet with a well-deﬁned
When such a grainy crystal is heated and approaches its melting
point, the grain boundaries may play a special role - they can act
as “seeds” of pre-melting regions. The phenomenon of grain
boundary melting can be studied in great detail with complex .. ,1 x, . ._ _ _. .7 _. . _ I .
plasmas,102 as illustrated in Fig. 9. This suggests that the less “:35 -_ ‘5'; f” ‘5‘ :‘_""7'-""-l':-.-"";;‘:. '3‘} 3”
perfect crystal structure and the associated interfacial free energy 3:37: 1‘71. ':_;.' j? .' f i ' - ..:\3:«~.~;§“¢v ;._.' ‘-
is the parameter that determines grain boundary melting. "" «:5? ’:_ h 1"" 3 ' “33:3“w-
These examples show that a ubiquitous and still poorly ”f}§:§§ii‘-:ijf‘i;’f '21:” ""1"":- ' ' .‘f “'-'-'c:""=-'-=::x:'-:""
understood process—like crystallization and melting—needs wtjx ""._i-""..' .5 I .' ;“_T::i 1"" :.‘
different inputs, different constraints, generalization from ""aze _'-_""':. {555:- ' "" T,
different sources and new approaches, so that the principal «a 7‘1""] ’.1i-J.?‘.’:-“,;:-.Z'i-'.'_"".'.‘j.;.::r5 :T '~ :I—""m
mechanisms can be identiﬁed and combined to a fundamental . . _
kinetic theory. Fig. 10 Lane. format1on 1n complerr plasmas. The small particles
(3.4 um) are 1nJected 1nto a cloud of b1g (9.2 um) background partlcles
(close to the midplane of the chamber, indicated by the horizontal dashed
4.2 Non-equilibrium phase transitions in driven systems line). Small particle are driven towards the center, stages of (a) initial lane
formation and (b) merging of lanes into larger streams are shown. At
Complex plasmas represent a broad class 0f thermodynamically stage (b) big particles also form well-deﬁned lanes. The frame indicates
Open systems where numerous types of self-organization can be the region used for the analysis of big particle dynamics. Adapted with
observed. The so-called “open” systems are systems that may permission from sutterlin et all“
1294 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
"9","surface, indicating the transition to the regime when the effective .. .° ”_ 1....” . :._..- . . , . 3” - ° '.o .- _ ~_
suriace tens1on plays the primary role (see Section 4.3.). : T mfg? «type: .31.:‘14... .0. 3
s we already p01nted out, complex plasmas pr0V1de a very 45;.» I: “3“. 3%.;4 35' . . «.m-
irnportant intermediate dynamical regime that is between Classic .’ . , szém° .1‘5.n‘_ ° '
undarnped ﬂuids and fully damped colloidal suspensions: in ""w‘nifz‘gé‘ﬁﬁ'ﬁ'g; Se}... .,
complex plasmas, the “internal” dynamics associated with the ~ - . ~wﬁ§§éﬁ5:’°' {-11.35 3'me
inter-particle interaction is undarnped whereas the large-scale :.°_- '.-,’.- °_'.'.."" °.'-..'. ', .7..°3f
hydrodynamics can be strongly affected by friction.
Fig. 12 Phase separation in binary complex plasmas. The experiments
g 4.3 Phase separation in binary systems are perforrned under micrograyity conditions onboard the International
g Space Station (ISS). Small partleles w1th diameter 3.4 um (red dots) were
g Phase separation in multicomponent mixtures is a ubiquitous injected into a stationary cloud of big particles with diameter 9.2 um
g phenomenoniiz occurring in very different systems, ranging from (green dots) and formed a spher01dal dreplet Wthh moved slowly
g molecular ﬂui ds113 t0 colloidal suspensions.“4’“5 This phenom- towards .the center of. the chamber (to the right). The ﬁgure shows the
N g . . . . longltudinalcross section. Adapted w1th permisswn from Wysocki et a1. 32
S 2 enon, despite its long research history, remains of fundamental
g 3 importance. In particular, the behavior of binary mixtures in the
3% E Vicinity of the critical point belongs to the same universality Class conditions the regime of the spinodal decomposition is easily
a go as that of the, for e.g., conventional 1iquid—vapor phase transi- achievable.118
8 3 tion (provided interparticle interactions are sufﬁciently short- Numerical MD simulations performed with the nonadditive
*2 g range), ferromagnetic transition in uniaxial magnets or the 3D interactions typical to complex plasmas fully support the theo-
8 g Ising mode],116 retical considerations.32 As soon as the driving force in the
g jg The tendency for particles of different types to mix or derniX is simulations is set below a certain threshold (which mimics the
E i basically determined by the relative strengths (nonadditiVity) of conditions corresponding to Fig. 12) the dernixing sets in. It
E g their interactions.117 It is noteworthy that the phase separation in evolves at the timescales of several seconds, similar to what was
<7: 8 such multicomponent systerns does not require an attraction in observed in the experiments, indicating a good quantitative
i: E the interparticle interactions—the necessary condition for the correspondence to the experiment. Fig. 11b shows a snapshot
E» g gas—ﬂuid phase transition in single-species systems. A Classical from “isotropic” simulations (126., without a background driving
4: o . . . . . . . . .
'3 Q example of the phase separat10n1n binary systerns1s the COIlOid— force). Typical particle Sizes in complex plasmas are ~102—103
13 § polymer demixing illustrated in Fig. 11a. times larger than those in colloid-polyrner mixtures, so that one
E g The phase separation in binary complex plasmas was recently can observe the onset of the spinodal decomposition, the
8 2:; observed in experiments performed under microgravity condi- coursing and crossover from the (initial) diffusive to the Viscous
g tions onboard the International Space Station (ISS).118 The growth regimes, etc. in greatest detail at the fully resolved kinetic
9‘ initial stage of this experiment is shown in Fig. 10, where the level.
formation of interpenetrating small- and big-particle lanes was These results provide us with strong grounds to believe that
observed. The later stage is illustrated in Fig. 12: when the small binary complex plasmas can effectively complement colloid—
particles approached the center of the Chamber and thus the polymer mixtures and be an ideal model system to study atom-
driVing ﬁeld practically vanished, an apparent phase separation istic dynamics of ﬂuid phase transitions and the associated
was observed accompanied by the formation of a small-particle phenomena, such as surface tension, critical behavior, etc.
droplet with a well-deﬁned ellipsoidal shape.
The tendency to phase separate does not depend on a partic-
ular shape of the interaction potential. The interaction nonad- 4'4 Hydrodynamics at the discreteness limit
ditiVity in complex plasmas is solely determined by a nonlinear Whilst the macroscopic (hydrodynamic) behavior of ﬂuids has
relation between the actual charge carried by a particle and an been well studied, the kinetic approach has Clearly suffered from
effective Charge that characterizes the interaction potential at the lack of experimental possibilities (or options). Of particular
large distances. One can derive the spinodal line for isotropic interest could be kineticinvestigations of the onset and nonlinear
binary complex plasmas and show that for typical experimental development of hydrodynamic instabilities (Kelvin—Helmholtz,
Rayleigh—Taylor, Tollrnien—Schlichting, eta). Individual particle
, f , .‘ , - . observations can provide crucial new insights—e.g., whether the
. ” r_ i coarse-grained concept of basic hydrodynamical instabilities is
. _ “ '. still adequate at interparticle distance scales,119 is there any
. . ~ '7 '5 t ‘ microscopic origin of instabilities120 (in particular, what are the
O t - ' t . ‘ , ' 3 trajectories that trigger instabilities), etc. Apparently, the answer
_4 7 if ‘ L W V; f ‘ ’ r ‘ 1 _ should depend on a particular problem and the similarity vari-
. . i 7“, . i A ""1 ables that play the major role (for instance, for a planar shear
a) A . ‘ ‘ b) ' t V f * . ﬂow this is, primarily, the Rayleigh and Mach numbers, for
~ ' ~ ‘ , ' ' ‘ a ﬂow past an obstacle or a droplet breakup this can be the
Fig. 11 Spinodal decomposition in (a) colloid—polymer mixtures115 and Weber number, etc.).
in (b) binary complex plasmas (MD simulations).32 Adapted with Complex plasmas can serve as a powerful new tool for ﬂuid
permission from Aarts er al.115 and Wysocki er a1. 32 investigations on (effectively) nanoscales, including the
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1295

"
"10","all-important mesoseopie transition from collective hydrody- Euﬁ'ﬁﬁfii'ZV‘it—aT—Ezﬁ isfgrjquﬁjﬁzv’ﬂ7"".2';
. . . . . . . ~~""Lﬁw""¢¢f~x‘é§¢:ﬁ:§: 31:7»? .‘gija’gi..-:—f. 1"" , ,‘-*: ‘ '- 1.
namie behaV1or to the dynamics of 1nd1V1dual particles mw$mrz~wﬁr3 :4 :¢;,_~;-:_:1- 332,393,, ‘
. . . . . :aﬁ'i‘étrz-drqf-vltlfaz-z— i..,~,-.:;w::-s:-7é‘ v. ."".
(see Fig. 13). Recent experiments w1th liquid complex plasmas ,~.:—5:~'ﬁ""~;:3_¢£‘?n—:3=-~;2575$ i:;:?i§ii:l«.'-.~;“ - - -
. . . . ?“w-r '-' w.7ﬁ”—'ﬁ~vé'bf""az sway: r- - vi .- -. '- .‘
suggested that the effective mechanism to trigger a local 1nsta- :;.:.-.'_.;..:.;'.j3.3.;;.3313: j;:;,..—~;,,.-: ; 5 ' “ .
bility of shear ﬂows could be large-angle particle scattering in fig. '3 ,_
localized structures and/or inhomogeneities of scales comparable f g f 3 f g 3 5 '; :.-' _'~.' ""I :'_‘-_.-;’.'.'.'
to the particle correlation length.120 This fruitful hypothesis, . '
however, requires further thorough investigations Also) the Fig. 14 Numerical SlmulathIlS Of the Shear ﬂOWS ObSCI‘VCd 1n CXpCI‘l-
mathematieal techniques to quantify the kinetic behavior and to meets Shown 1“ Flg' 13' The Slmelauens were perfeemed fer_the plasma
g transfer this to macroscopic scales still need to be developed. parameters relevant to the experlment. Adapted w1th perm1ss1on from
g . . . Morﬁll 61611.121
c In articular, a roeess to be studied is the develo ment of self-
0 p p p
a organized nonlinear motion in different ﬂow patterns.122 Recent
8 complex plasma experiments coupled with the appropriate to white). The topology of the mixing layer found in the simu-
N g theoretical and numerical simulation support Clearly demon- lations corresponds Closely to the measurements, which supports
§ 2 strated that such measurements can provide new insights into our kinetic interpretation.
E g both temperature-driven and shear-driven ﬂow phenomena.121
3 3 The observations suggest that the width and the structure of the .
o w . . . . 5 Conclusmns
c; 5 trans1tion (m1x1ng) layer strongly depends on the geometry. In
3 E different regions of the mieropartiele Cloud different ﬂow The research on complex plasmas gives us a unique opportunity
§ § topologies are observed, With the (average) ﬂOW lines being either to go beyond the limits of continuous media down to the smallest
3 $1 straight (a) or curved (b). The lower part Of the system iS in the length scale available—the interpartiele distance and thus to
g g crystalline state at rest. For the planar ﬂow the crystalline study all relevant dynamical and structural processes using the
g 8 interface iS remarkably SIDOOth, With the ﬂOW along a particular fully resolved motion of individual particles, from the onset of
i g (crystalline) monolayer. The trajectories 0f individual ﬂowing cooperative phenomena to large strongly coupled systems. Since
7;, 2 particles experience only weak deﬂections and the overall ﬂow the background gas is usually dilute, the particle dynamics in
(1) . .
‘2“ 45 appears to be stable and laminar. In contrast, the curved ﬂow strongly coupled complex plasmas are Virtually undamped,
3 g interface has a curious “rough” structure, the ﬂow is unstable and which provides a direct analogy to regular liquids and solids in
E a not laminar, a “mixing layer” is formed between the ﬂowing terms of the atomistic dynamics. Individual particles can be
g f; regime and the crystalline region—this iS where momentum easily manipulated in different ways, so that one can perform
g 1;) transfer takes place. It iS also apparent that the mixing layer active controllable experiments to investigate apartieular generic
Q 3% becomes unstable at the individual particle level. The micro- process occurring in liquids or solids at the kinetic level.
g seopie driving mechanism for the instability seen in Fig. 13b is
m . . . . . .
identiﬁed as the centrifu all driven Ra le1 h—Ta lor 1nsta-
. . . g y y g. y Acknowledgements
bility. Analyzmg a whole sequence of such images, one can
quantify this perturbation in two ways: the fraction of inter- This work was supported by DLR/BMBF under grants no’s
penetrating particles, and the fraction of particles undergoing 50WM9852, 50WP0203, 50WP0204, 50WM038, and by RFBR
large angle collisions in the surface layer. For the straight ﬂow, Grant No. 06-02-08100.
the quantities are (almost) 0% and approximately 5%, for the
curved ﬂow, approximately 5% and 30%. This can be understood R f
kinetically in terms of the higher collision frequency with smaller e erences
impact parameter due to particle inertia at a curved surface. This 1 R. A. J ones, Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press, New
has also been conﬁrmed by numerical simulations as shown in York, 2002-
F. 14( t. l l 't' l d . . f bl k 2 G. E. Morﬁll and A. V. IVleV, Rev. Mod. Phys, 2009, 81, 1353—1404.
1g. p ar 1C e V6 oc11es are grey-sca e ,1ncreas1ng rom a0 3 V. E. Fortov, A. V. IVleV, S. A. Khrapak, A. G. Khrapak and
G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rep, 2005, 421, 1.
4 V. E. Fortov and G. E. Morﬁll, Complex and dusty plasmas: from
3 _ _ _ _ '- laboratory to Space, CRC Press, New York, 2010.
‘5.)';;.- 55:13-53» ‘31-; ant; 3,} f 11,35233;::f:}’:.'-,v§.~$i:.g;,:_f;%23“}? - 5 H. M. Thomas and G. E. Morﬁll, Nature, 1996, 379, 806.
wf~——3=-:=Q‘:3; 3; :2:3:35;;5315:;gg-gggy-:.-.£ ' 6 P. N. Pusey and w. van Megen, Nature, 1986, 320, 340.
‘ ’ r ‘ ‘ “ '° "" '21‘."":51,M I.'."",'-'. 7 V. J . Anderson and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, Nature, 2002, 416, 811.
' 3.111.: .1_.: 3. ‘31-.. 3 ; ‘ . 311-"" :f 8 D. Frenkel, Science, 2006, 314, 768.
3 . I z . .‘ '. .‘ ' 3 N; .3 ._'.;c}: 3'3 9 T. Palberg, J. Phys: Condens. Matter, 1999, 11, R323.
.‘ ' '. .. . . - -- - - .' J - .. ' -- ' - ‘ "" ' ' ' ‘ ' "" ' ’ ~ ' 10 A. V. Zobnin, A. P. Nefedov, V. A. Sinelshchikov and V. E. Fortov,
, _ J. Exp. T hear. Phys, 2000, 91, 483.
Fig. 13 Two examples of hlghly resolved complex plasma ﬂows. 11 M. Lampe, R. Goswami, Z. Sternovsky, S. Robertson,
Experiments were performed with 1.28 am diameter particles at neutral V. Gavrishchaka, G. Ganguli and G. Joyce, Phys. Plasmas, 2003,
gas pressure 22 Pa. The ﬁgures show (a) a shear ﬂow over the ﬂat surface 10, 1500—1513.
plasma crystal and (b) a ﬂow over a curved surface plasma crystal. There 12 5- Ratynskaia, 5- Khrapak, A- Zobnin, M- H- Thoma,
are small angle perturbations in the particle trajectories in (a) whereas M' Kretschmer, A' UsacheV, V' Yaroshenko, R' A' Qu1nn,
. . . . G. E. Morﬁll, O. Petrov and V. Fortov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93,
con51derably larger scatterlng occurs 1n the curved ﬂow 1n (b). The 085001
separation between the particles is of the order of 100 uni and the ﬂow 13 S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2008, 15’ 114503.
velomty 1s (a) = 1mm S‘1 and (b) = 0.7 mm s_l. Adapted Wlth permlsswn 14 s. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Contrib. Plasma Phys, 2009, 49,
from Morﬁll 61 611.121 148.
1296 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
"11","15 S. A. Khrapak, S. V. Ratynskaia, A. V. Zobnin, A. D. Usachev, V. I. Molotkov, T. Reiter, M. Turin and P. Vinogradov, Phys.
V. V. Yaroshenko, M. H. Thoma, M. Kretschmer, H. Héfner, Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 095003.
G. E. Morﬁll, O. F. Petrov and V. E. Fortov, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., 52 U. Dassanayake, S. Fraden and A. van Blaaderen, J. Chem. Phys.,
Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 016406. 2000, 112, 3851—3858.
16 M. Chaudhuri, S. A. Khrapak, R. Kompaneets and G. E. Morﬁll, 53 A. Yethiraj and A. van Blaaderen, Nature, 2003, 421, 513.
IEEE T ranS. Plasma Sci, 2010, 38, 818. 54 A.-P. Hynninen and M. Dijkstra, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 138303.
17 J. E. Daugherty, R. K. Porteous, M. D. Kilgore and D. B. Graves, 55 W. Wen, X. Huang and P. Sheng, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 200.
J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 72, 3934. 56 A. V. IVleV, S. K. Zhdanov, B. A. Klumov, V. N. Tsytovich, U. (16
18 S. Ratynskaia, U. (16 Angelis, S. Khrapak, B. Klumov and Angelis and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nanlinear, Soft
G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2006, 13, 104508. Matter Phys., 2004, 70, 066401.
19 S. A. Khrapak, A. V. IVleV, G. E. Morﬁll and H. M. Thomas, Phys. 57 U. (16 Angelis, A. V. IVleV, G. E. Morﬁll and V. N. Tsytovich, Phys.
0 Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2002, 66, 046414. Plasmas, 2005, 12, 052301.
a 20 S. A. Khrapak, A. V. IVleV, G. E. Morﬁll and S. K. Zhdanov, Phys. 58 A. V. IVleV, S. K. Zhdanov, B. A. Klumov and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys.
g Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 225002. Plasmas, 2005, 12, 092104.
2 21 Y. L. Al’pert, A. V. GureVich and L. P. Pitaevsky, Space Physics with 59 A. V. IVleV and G. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. E: S tat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids,
g Artiﬁcial Satellites, Consultants Bureau, New York, 1965. Relat. Interdiscip. T 0p., 2000, 63, 016409.
g 22 V. N. Tsytovich, PhyS.-Usp., 1997, 40, 53. 60 A. V. IVleV, U. Konopka, G. Morﬁll and G. Joyce, Phys. Rev. E:
N g 23 C. H. Su and S. H. Lam, Phys. Fluids, 1963, 6, 1479—1491. Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2003, 68, 026405.
§ 2 24 S. A. Khrapak, G. E. Morﬁll, A. G. Khrapak and L. G. D’yachkov, 61 S. K. Zhdanov, A. V. IVleV and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2009,
a :. Phys. Plasmas, 2006, 13, 052114. 16, 083706.
E 8 25 S. A. Khrapak, B. A. Klumov and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. Lett., 62 L. Couédel, V. Nosenko, A.V.IV1€V, S. K. Zhdanov, H. M. Thomas
E :0 2008, 100, 225003. and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 195001.
""q” ‘5 26 A. V. Filippov, A. G. Zagorodniy, A. F. Pal, A. N. Starostin and 63 A. M. Ignatov, Plasma Phys. Rep, 1996, 22, 585.
e g A. I. Momot, JET P Lett., 2007, 86, 761. 64 V. N. Tsytovich, Y. K. Khodataev and R. Bingham, Comments
g B 27 A. V. FilippOV, A. G. Zagorodniy, A. I. Momot, A. F. Pal and Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion, 1996, 17, 249.
8 g A. N. Starostin, J. Exp. T hear. Phys., 2007, 104, 147. 65 S. A. Khrapak, A. V. IVleV and G. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. E: Stat.,
8 \Q 28 M. Chaudhuri, S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2001, 64, 046403.
Q g 2008, 15, 053703. 66 S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2008, 15,
g g 29 S. A. Khrapak, A. V. IVleV and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2010, 084502.
.3: c; 17, 042107. 67 V. N. Tsytovich, Y. K. Khodataev, G. E. Morﬁll, R. Bingham and
<11 § 30 D. Else, R. Kompaneets and S. V. VladimirOV, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., J . Winter, Comments Plasma Phys. Controlled Fusion, 1998, 18,
E3 5 Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2009, 80, 016403. 281.
CZ“ a 31 M. Chaudhuri, R. Kompaneets and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 68 J . E. Daugherty and D. B. Graves, 39th National Symposium of the
E"" 8 2010, 17, 063705. American Vacuum Society, 1993, V01. 11, pp. 1126—1131.
U a 32 A. Wysocki, C. Réith, A. V. IVleV, K. R. Sﬁtterlin, H. M. Thomas, 69 G. H. P. M. Swinkels, H. Kersten, H. Deutsch and
'66; 8 S. Khrapak, S. Zhdanov, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev, G. M. W. Kroesen, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 1747—1755.
% g V. I. Molotkov, O. F. Petrov, H. Léwen and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. 70 S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2006, 13, 104506.
3 .3 Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 045001. 71 S. G. Brush, H. L. Sahlin and E. Teller, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 45,
8 3;; 33 M. Nambu, S. V. Vladimirov and P. K. Shukla, Phys. Lett. A, 1995, 2102—2118.
E 203, 40. 72 J.-P. Hansen and L. Verlet, Phys. Rev., 1969, 184, 151—161.
g 34 S. V. VladimirOV and M. Nambu, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, 73 G. Malescio, J. Phys; Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 073101.
Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. T 0p, 1995, 52, R2172—R2174. 74 V. J . Anderson and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, Nature, 2002, 416, 811.
35 S. V. Vladimirov and O. Ishihara, Phys. Plasmas, 1996, 3, 444—446. 75 M. D. Rintoul and S. Torquato, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 4198—
36 O. Ishihara and S. V. Vladimirov, Phys. Plasmas, 1997, 4, 69—74. 4201.
37 G. Lapenta, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. 76 M. Watzlawek, C. N. Likos and H. Léwen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999,
Interdiscip. Top, 2000, 62, 1175—1 181. 82, 5289—5292.
38 F. Melandsg and J. Goree, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, 77 S. Prestipino, F. Saija and P. V. Giaquinta, Phys. Rev. E: Stat.,
Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top, 1995, 52, 5312—5326. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 050102.
39 M. Lampe, G. Joyce, G. Ganguli and V. Gavrishchaka, Phys. 78 S. Hamaguchi, R. T. Farouki and D. H. E. Dubin, Phys. Rev. E:
Plasmas, 2000, 7, 3851—3861. Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. T 0p., 1997, 56,
40 S. A. Maiorov, S. V. Vladimirov and N. F. Cramer, Phys. Rev. E: 4671—4682.
Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. T 0p., 2000, 63, 79 S. A. Khrapak, H. M. Thomas and G. E. Morﬁll, Europhys. Lett.,
017401. 2010, 91, 25001.
41 G. Lapenta, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2002, 80 D. H. E. Dubin and T. M. O’Neil, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1999, 71, 87.
66, 026409. 81 P. K. Shukla and B. Eliasson, Rev. Mad. Phys., 2009, 81, 25—44.
42 S. V. Vladimirov, S. A. Maiorov and O. Ishihara, Phys. Plasmas, 82 E. J . Meijer and D. Frenkel, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 94, 2269—2271.
2003, 10, 3867—3873. 83 M. J. Stevens and M. 0. Robbins, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 2319—
43 W. J . Miloch, S. V. Vladimirov, H. L. Pécseli and J . Trulsen, Phys. 2324.
Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 78, 036411. 84 G. S. Stringfellow, H. E. DeWitt and W. L. Slattery, Phys. Rev. A:
44 V. L. Ginzburg, PhyS.-Usp., 1996, 39, 973. AL, M01, Opt. Phys., 1990, 41, 1105—1111.
45 A. Melzer, V. A. Schweigert, I. V. Schweigert, A. Homann, S. Peters 85 W. G. Hoover, S. G. Gray and K. W. J ohnson, J. Chem. Phys., 1971,
and A. Piel, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. 55, 1128—1136.
Interdiscip. Top, 1996, 54, R46—R49. 86 R. Agrawal and D. A. Kofke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 122—125.
46 A. Melzer, V. A. Schweigert and A. Piel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 87 S. Prestipino, F. Saija and P. V. Giaquinta, J. Chem. Phys., 2005,
3194—3197. 123, 144110.
47 L.-J. Hou, Y.-N. Wang and Z. L. Miékovié, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., 88 S.A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll,Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 255003.
Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2003, 68, 016410. 89 S. A. Khrapak, S. K. Zhdanov, A. V. IVleV and G. E. Morﬁll, J.
48 R. Kompaneets, G. E. Morﬁll and A. V. IVleV, Phys. Plasmas, 2009, Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 033307.
16, 043705. 90 S. A. Khrapak, G. E. Morﬁll, V. E. Fortov, L. G. D’yachkov,
49 R. Kompaneets, U. Konopka, A. V. IVleV, V. Tsytovich and A. G. Khrapak and O. F. Petrov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 055003.
G. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2007, 14, 052108. 91 O. S. Vaulina and S. A. Khrapak, J. Exp. T hear. Phys., 2000, 90, 287.
50 M. Chaudhuri, S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 92 O. Vaulina, S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. E: Stat.,
2007, 14, 022102. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2002, 66, 016404.
51 A. V. IVleV, G. E. Morﬁll, H. M. Thomas, C. Réith, G. Joyce, 93 S. A. Khrapak, M. Chaudhuri and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Rev. B:
P. Huber, R. Kompaneets, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev, Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 052101.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011 Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 | 1297

"
"12","94 S. A. Khrapak, G. E. Morﬁll, A. V. IVleV, H. M. Thomas, 110 G. E. Morﬁll, U. Konopka, M. Kretschmer, M. Rubin-Zuzic,
D. A. Beysens, B. Zappoli, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev and H. M. Thomas, S. K. Zhdanov and V. TsytOVich, New J. Phys.,
V. I. Molotkov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 015001. 2006, 8, 7.
95 K. AVinash, S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, Phys. Plasmas, 2009, 111 K. R. Sﬁtterlin, A. Wysocki, A. V. IVleV, C. Réith, H. M. Thomas,
16, 073706. M. Rubin-Zuzic, W. J. Goedheer, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev,
96 D. M. Herlach, et a1, Mater. Sci. Eng, A, 1994, 178, 1. V. I. Molotkov, O. F. Petrov, G. E. Morﬁll and H. Léwen, Phys.
97 A. C. Levi and M. Kotrla, J. Phys; Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 299. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 085003.
98 M. Zuzic, A. V. IVleV, J. Goree, G. E. Morﬁll, H. M. Thomas, 112 A. Onuki, Phase T ransition Dynamics, Cambridge University,
H. Rothermel, U. Konopka, R. Sﬁtterlin and D. D. Goldbeck, Cambridge, 2002.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 4064—4067. 113 J. S. Rowlinson and F. Swinton, Liquids and Liquid Mixtures,
99 A. M. Alsayed, et al, Science, 2005, 309, 1207. Butterworths, London, 1982.
Q 100 H. Gleiter, Prog. Mater. Sci, 1989, 33, 223. 114 J. P. Hansen and H. Léwen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem, 2000, 51, 209.
a 101 H. Gleiter, Acta Mater., 2000, 48, 1. 115 G. A. L. Aarts, R. P. A. Dullens and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, New J.
g 102 M. Rubin-Zuzic, G. E. Morﬁll, A. V. IVleV, R. Pompl, Phys., 2005, 7, 40.
2 B. A. Klumov, W. Bunk, H. M. Thomas, H. Rothermel, 0. anes 116 M. E. Fisher, Rev. Mad. Phys., 1974, 46, 597—616.
8 and Fouquét, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 181. 117 J . P. Hansen and I. McDonald, T heary Ofsimple liquids, Academic,
g 103 I. Prigogine, me Being 10 Becoming, Freeman, San Francisco, New York, 1986.
N g 1980. 118 A. V. IVleV, S. K. Zhdanov, H. M. Thomas and G. E. Morﬁll,
S g 104 A. Hasegawa, Adv. Phys., 1985, 34, 1. Europhys. Lett., 2009, 85, 45001.
g .j. 105 D. Helbing, I. J . Farkas and T. Vicsek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 119 A. Wysocki and H. LéwenJ. Phys..' Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 7209.
E 8 1240—1243. 120 G. E. Morﬁll, M. Rubin-Zuzic, H. Rothermel, A. V. IVleV,
g :0 106 M. E. Leunissen, et al, Nature, 2005, 437, 235. B. A. Klumov, H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka and V. Steinberg,
""q” ‘5 107 J . Dzubiella, G. P. Hoffmann and H. Léwen, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 175004.
e E NOnlinear, 50ft Matter Phys., 2002, 65, 021402. 121 G. E. Morﬁll, S. A. Khrapak, A. V. IVleV, B. A. Klumov, M. Rubin-
g B 108 B. Schmittmann and R. K. P. Zia, Phys. Rep, 1998, 301, 45. Zuzic and H. M. Thomas, Phys. Sen, 2004, T107, 59.
8 3 109 R. R. Netz, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 63, 616. 122 M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, Rev. Mad. Phys., 1993, 65, 851.
o x
a 8
f: O
< E
‘z"" E
5 §
1: Q
a g
E 3
Q 4%
E
1298 | Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 1287—1298 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011

"
